What is cancer?
Cancer affects 1 in 3 people in the United States. Chances are that you or
someone you know has been affected by cancer.
Cancer starts when there are changes in parts of a
person s cells (genes). These abnormal cells can grow
Glossary
out of control and crowd out normal cells. Cancer cells
Here are some words you might hear from your
can also spread from where they start to other parts of
cancer care team.
the body.
Benign: Tumors that are not cancer
Where can cancer start?
Biomarkers: Parts of some cancer cells that might
Cancer can start in any part of the body. This includes
be used to choose the best treatment, check to
organs, muscles, bones, and blood. Cancer is named for
see whether treatment is working, and watch to
the part of the body or type of cell where it begins. For
see if a cancer has come back. They are also called
example, cancer that starts in the breast is called breast
tumor markers.
cancer. Even if it spreads to other parts of the body, it is
still called breast cancer. Cancer stage: The size of a cancer and if it has
spread from where it started
When cancer spreads and grows
Cancer treatment plan: Outline of the treatments
Cancer cells can sometimes spread to other parts of the
you will get, when you will get them, and how long
body (metastasis). They can end up in the lymph nodes
treatment is likely to last
or other body organs, causing problems with how the
body works. Genes: Parts of cells that tell them when to
grow, divide, and act. You get your genes from
Some types of cancer grow fast. Others grow more
your parents.
slowly. Some are more likely to spread to other parts of
Lymph nodes: Small structures that filter the fluid
the body. Others tend to stay where they started.
in the body. They trap things like cancer cells and
What is a tumor? infections. Immune cells in the lymph nodes help
A tumor is a mass or lump made up of many cells. Some the body fight infections and cancer.
tumors are cancer (malignant), but many tumors are not
Malignant: Tumors that are cancer
cancer (benign).
Metastasis: When cancer spreads from one part of
Some cancers are caused by changes in blood cells and the body to another
don t cause tumors. These are cancers such as leukemia,
Risk factor: Something that raises the chance of
myeloma, and lymphoma.
getting cancer
What causes cancer? Screening tests: Tests done to look for cancer
Many things can raise your risk of cancer, such as: before a person has any symptoms
  Certain lifestyle habits, like smoking
  Gene changes that you get from your parents
(inherited)
  Exposure at work, home, or outside to things that
can cause cancer
These things can cause changes in genes that might done on your cancer cells to see if they have any changes
lead to cancer. But many times, there is no known cause that might affect treatment (biomarkers). Your overall
for cancer. health and personal preferences will also affect your
treatment options.
You can t change the genes you get from your parents,
but you might lower your risk of cancer by: Cancer is treated with surgery, radiation, and medicines.
More than one type of treatment is often used if they
  Staying away from tobacco and secondhand smoke
work better together.
  Eating healthy foods
  Being active Surgery is used to remove part or all of a cancer.
  Staying at a healthy weight It may be the only treatment needed if the cancer is
  Limiting how much alcohol you drink just in one place. Or surgery may be used along with
  Protecting your skin from the sun other treatments.
Radiation can kill or slow the growth of cancer cells in
How is cancer found?
one area of the body. Most radiation treatments are like
Some cancers are found when a person has symptoms
getting an x-ray. But sometimes the radiation is placed
that don t go away. Other cancers are found when a
inside your body close to the tumor.
person has no symptoms and gets regular screening
tests. Screening tests can help find certain cancers early,
Medicines are used to kill cancer cells or make them
when treatment is more likely to be successful.
grow more slowly. They can treat cancer in any part of
the body. These medicines are called chemotherapy,
What does cancer stage mean?
targeted therapy, immunotherapy, and hormone
Once a cancer is found, the cancer care team will want
therapy.
to find out the stage of the cancer and any other factors
that can be used to help decide the best treatment. Some of these medicines are put into a vein through
a needle (IV). Others are taken as a pill. And some are
To find the stage of a cancer, tests are done to see how
given in other ways like being put into the bladder. Each
big the cancer is and if it has spread to other parts of the
medicine works in a different way, so sometimes two or
body. A lower stage (such as a stage 1 or 2) means that
more are combined.
the cancer has not spread very much. A higher number
(such as a stage 3 or 4) means it has spread more. You and your cancer care team will decide together
which treatment is best for you. The team will continue
How is cancer treated?
to support you through your treatment. They will answer
Cancer treatment depends on the type and stage of
questions, help manage side effects, and keep track of
your cancer. It will also depend on tests that might be
how your treatment is working.
For more information and support, visit the American Cancer Society website at
cancer.org/cancer or call us at 1227-2345. We re here when you need us.
 2026, American Cancer Society, Inc.
No. 004506 Rev. 2/26