Radiation Safety Training Module: Diagnostic Radiology
Medical Imaging Techniques
Radiological Safety Division
Atomic Energy Regulatory Board
Contents
  Objective   Dental Radiography
  Bone Mineral Densitometry
  Expected questions to know after
  Computed Tomography
studying this lecture
  Image Properties
  Introduction
  Typical Technical Parameters of
  Modalities in Radiology Diagnostic X-ray Equipment
  Radiography   Summary/ Learning Outcomes
  Expected Questions
  Detectors used in X-ray Imaging
  References and sources for
  Fluoroscopy
additional information
  Mammography
Objective
  To become familiar with basic knowledge of the components of the radiographic
chain.
  To become familiar with the component of the fluoroscopy system (design, technical
parameters that affect the fluoroscopic image quality and Quality Control).
  To understand the principles of interventional radiology system including equipment
design, operational consideration and Quality Control.
  To understand the principles of dental radiology system and mammography system
including design and Quality Control.
  To understand the principles and the technology of CT equipment.
Topics to know after studying this lecture
  Different modalities of X-ray imaging
  Different Detectors used in X-ray Imaging
  How X-ray image is formed in radiography?
  Difference between mammography system and diagnostic X-ray system
  Difference between Dental (intra-oral) and Dental (OPG) equipment
  Difference between radiography & CT images
Introduction
  X-rays were first discovered by German Physicist, W. C. Roentgen in 1895.
  In India, medical x-rays were first used in1898 within three years of the discovery of X-
rays.
  In 1972, Computed Tomography was first introduced in medical field.
  In 1913, Albert Solomon, German Surgeon, was the first scientist who used X-ray
techniques in breast cancer radiology which came to be known as mammography.
  In 1960, John R. Cameron invented the bone densitometer.

Introduction
  Medical imaging of the human body requires some form of energy (radiation). In imaging techniques used
in radiology, the energy used to produce the image must be capable of penetrating tissues.
  In diagnostic X-ray imaging, images are formed by the interaction of the X-ray beam with the patient.
  As the X-ray beam passes through the patient, the photons interact with the body tissues and are
absorbed/scattered by the patient. The degree of absorption is related to the density of the material that is in
the beam s path.
  Dense objects (such as bone and metal) have a high degree of photon absorption, while less dense objects
(such as fat and water) absorbs less photons.
  The differential absorption of photons by different materials in the photons' path results in the beam exiting
the patient with different intensities. This is known as transmitted beam.
  A detector is used to measure the intensity variation, thus providing information on the different densities in
the beam s path.
Imaging Modalities in Radiology
The different modes of making images are referred to as imaging modalities.
Each Imaging Modality has its own applications in medicine.
Various Modalities of Radiology are:
  Radiography
  Fluoroscopy
  Mammography
  Dental Radiography
  Bone Mineral Densitometry
  Computed Tomography
Origin of X-ray Source remains same for
all x-ray imaging devices
i.e X-ray tube
Evacuated
glass tube
Target
Filament
Radiography
  Radiography X-ray equipment has an x-ray tube on one side and an x-ray detector on the other side
of the patient. A short duration pulse of x-rays is emitted by the x-ray tube, a large fraction of the x-
rays interacts in the patient, some of the x-rays pass through the patient (transmitted x-rays) and
reach the detector. These transmitted x-rays form the radiographic image on the film/detector.
  In radiography, the image is formed with screen-film system, CR cassette or with digital detectors.
  In screen-film radiography, areas of high intensity (thus low material absorption) within transmitted
beam result in more blackening of the film, while areas of low intensity (thus high material absorption)
will result in less blackening of the film. The film will remain white in areas with no photons.
  Human body is made up of tissues with varying densities, in the film black corresponds to tissues with
little attenuation (such as air) and white corresponds to tissue with a high degree of attenuation (such
as bone).
Radiography....
  Radiography is a transmission imaging
modality.
  Radiography is also referred as projection
imaging modality.
  Projection imaging refers to the acquisition
of a two dimensional image of the patient s
three- dimensional anatomy.
  Typical tube voltages range from 50 -150
kVp.
Typical layout of a Radiography
room
X-ray Image Formation
Film, fluorescent screen
or image intensifier
Scattered
radiation
  Latent  
radiological
Bone
Image
formed by
X Soft
transmitted
tissue
beam
Primary
collimation
Antiscatter Grid Beam intensity
at detector level
Image acquisition-Detectors used in Radiography
1) Screen film based
2) Photostimulable phosphor plates (PSP).
  Called CR (computed radiography)
3)Direct digital radiography (flat panel detectors)
-------Direct conversion (selenium)
-------Indirect conversion (scintillation)

Detectors used in X-ray Imaging
Screen- Film System
  The X-ray film is sandwiched between two intensifying screens. Radiographic film consists of one or two layers of
film emulsion {grains of silver halide, silver bromide (AgBr )and silver iodide (AgI) bounded in a gelatin base} coated
on a flexible sheet of Mylar (a type of plastic).
  Intensifying screens are made of a scintillating material, called phosphor. Earlier screens use calcium tungstate
phosphors, while now rare earth screens use gadolinium or lanthanum phosphors. Gadolinium Oxy Bromide and
Lanthanum Oxy Sulphide are some commonly used intensifying screen phosphors.
  Intensifying Screens are used to reduce the radiation dose to the patient in diagnostic radiography.
  As X-ray films are more sensitive to light than X-rays, the Intensifying screen are used to convert X-rays falling on it
into light. Each X-ray photon falling on the screen releases many light photons, which reach the film and form the
image.
  Image formation is done by transmitted radiation. However, scatter radiation also reaches the film, thereby reducing
the image quality. The antiscatter grid (bucky) is used to cut off the scatter radiation reaching the film. It is placed
above the screen-film during imaging.
Film-Screen Imaging
Traditionally, all X-ray image capture has been through X-ray film
Emulsion
Protective
Adhesive
Film base
layer
layer
Emulsion
Intensifying screens
  Film is relatively insensitive to X-rays directly
  Only about 2% of the X-rays would interact with the emulsion
  Requires unacceptably high doses to give a diagnostic image
  An intensifying screen is a phosphor sheet the same size as the film, which
converts the X-rays to a pattern of light photons
  The intensity of the light is proportional to the intensity of X-rays
  The pattern of light is then captured by the film
  One exception is intraoral dental radiography, where screens are not
practical
The film-cassette
  Flat, light tight box with pressure pads to
ensure film in good contact with the
screen(s) mounted on the front (and back)
  The tube side of the cassette is low atomic
number material (Z~6) to minimise
attenuation
  Rear of cassette often lead backed to
minimise back scatter (not in
mammography)
Film Processing
  The invisible latent image is made visible
by processing
  There are three stages to this process;
  Development
  Fixing
  Washing
Computed Radiography (CR)
Computed Radiography
  Computed radiography (CR) is a marketing term for photostimulable phosphor
(PSP) detector systems.
  When X-rays are absorbed by photostimulable
  Phosphors, some light is promptly emitted much of absorbed energy is trapped
in the PSP screen and can be read out later
  CR imaging plates are made of BaFBr and BaFI
  The imaging plate is exposed in a procedure identical to screen-film radiography
and the CR cassette is then brought to a CR reader unit
  The cassette is moved into the reader unit and the imaging plate is
mechanically removed
Rota ing Mirror
Tr.ans
a1lion
R.orUer'
PSP digitizer
Cassette and PSP
Digital Radiography
Workstation
Digital Radiography
Digital Radiography (DR)
  Receptor provides direct digital output
  No processor / reader required
  Images available in < 15 seconds
  Much less work for technologist
Digital Radiography System
  Digital radiography is
performed with a system of
the following functional
components:
  A digital image receptor
  A digital image processing unit
  An image management system
Risk of increased doses
  The wide dynamic range of digital detectors
results in good image quality while using high
dose technique at the entrance of the detector
and at the entrance of the patient
  This is not possible with conventional screen-film
systems since high dose techniques always result
in an image which is too dark
Detectors used in X-
ray Imaging 
Flat Panel Detectors
Indirect Flat panel Detectors: Indirect flat panel detectors are sensitive to visible light, and an X-ray intensifying
screen is used to convert incident X-rays to light, which is then detected by the flat panel detector. Silicon is
commonly used flat panel detector.
Direct Flat panel Detectors: Direct flat panel detectors are made from a layer of photoconductor material on top
of a Thin-Film-Transistor (TFT) array. Selenium is commonly used as the photoconductor.
Indirect Flat Panel Detector Direct Flat Panel Detector
Fluoroscopy
  Fluoroscopy refers to the continuous acquisition of a
sequence of x-ray images over time, essentially a real-time
x-ray movie of the patient. It is called dynamic imaging.
  Most general-purpose fluoroscopy systems use television
technology, which provides images at the rate of 30 frames
per second.
  Newer fluoroscopy systems allow the acquisition of a real-
time digital sequence of images (digital video), that can be
played back as a movie loop.
  Fluoroscopy is used for positioning catheters in arteries, for
visualizing contrast agents in the gastrointestinal (GI) tract,
and for other medical applications such as invasive
therapeutic procedures where real-time image feedback is
necessary.

Fluoroscopy .
Fluoroscopy mode of Operation
Continuous Fluoroscopy
  Continuous fluoroscopy is the basic form of fluoroscopy. It uses a continuously on x-ray beam
using typically 0.5 and 4 mA (depending upon patient thicknesses).
  A video camera displays the image at 30 frames/sec, so that each fluoroscopic frame requires 33
milliseconds.
Pulsed Fluoroscopy
  In pulsed fluoroscopy, the x-ray generator produces a series of short x-ray pulses. Pulsed
fluoroscopy offers better image quality in fluoroscopic procedures where body motion is high.
  Pulsed fluoroscopy at variable frame rates (typically 30,15 and 7.5 frames/sec) allows the
fluoroscopist to reduce temporal resolution when it is not needed sparing dose in return.
Last  Frame  Hold
  When the fluoroscopist takes his or her foot off of the fluoroscopy pedal, rather than seeing a
blank monitor, last-frame-hold enables the last live image to be shown continuously, until the next
image acquisition.
  Last-frame-hold is very convenient and can reduce the dose to the patient.
Detectors used in Fluoroscopy 
In fluoroscopy equipment following detectors are used:
  Intensifying Screen: Used in conventional fluoroscopy
  Image Intensifier: (discussed below)
  Digital detectors: As discussed in the earlier slides of Radiography
Image Intensifier
The function of the x-ray Image Intensifier is to convert an x-ray image
into a minified light image.
Input screen (CsI): conversion of incident X-rays into light photons
1 X  ray photon creates   3,000 light photons
Photocathode: conversion of light photons into electrons
only 10 to 20% of light photons are converted into photoelectrons
Electrodes : focalization of electrons onto the output screen.
electrodes provide the electronic magnification
Output screen: conversion of accelerated electrons into light photons.

Fluoroscopy .
C-Arm equipment

Ability to maneuver c-arm around patient
without moving the patient

Often used as  mobile  unit

Critical care units

Operation Theatre

Modern units allow fluro + radiography

Fluoroscopy .
Angiography

Angiography is a specialized fluoroscopic
examination in which a contrast agent is used to
highlight vasculature in the patient.

Contrast is a radiographic (high density) material
injected into the blood vessels of the patient.

Vessels containing contrast show up dark on the
image, while areas without contrast show up bright.

Advanced techniques, such as Digital Subtraction
Angiography can be utilized to improve vessel
visualization and also guide percutaneous tools.

Fluoroscopy ..
Interventional radiology
 Interventional radiology uses the high capacity C-arm
equipment with additional features to guide minimally
invasive surgical procedures.
 Interventional radiology comprises fluoroscopically
guided therapeutic and diagnostic techniques.
 Interventional techniques are used during diagnostic
interventions or for therapeutic purposes as well as
during surgical procedures to guide or monitor the
surgeon s actions.
 A good knowledge of equipment specification and
characteristics is essential for an effective optimization of
radiation protection
Typical layout of an IR facility
Mammography
  X-ray mammography is the most reliable method of detecting breast
cancer.
  It is employed both as a screening tool and for diagnosis.
  Mammography also uses x-rays for breast imaging; however, there
are fundamental differences between a mammography system and a
diagnostic x-ray system. Due to the tissue characteristics of the
breast and pathology of interest, mammography systems utilize lower
tube potential (15-35 kVp ).
  Molybdenum (Mo) and Rhodium (Rh) are the commonly used
target/filter combinations in mammography. Characteristic X-ray
produced by these target materials is used for breast imaging.
  In addition, two compression plates are used to decrease breast
thickness and minimize motion, thus resulting in the less scatter
radiation and better overall image quality.
Typical layout of Mammo room
Dental Radiography
A) Dental (Intra-oral x-ray examination)
  Dedicated equipment used for radiography of tooth with low power
stationary anode tube
  Tube is deployed on an extendable arm for easier positioning
  Tube potential : 60-70 kVp
  Tube current : 6-7 mA
  Exposure is varied by altering the exposure time
  Exposure time varies from 30 ms to 2.5 s
  Focus-skin distance 10 cm for 60 kV,
20 cm for 60-75 kVp
  Diameter of lead cone (collimator) diameter shall be less than 7.5 cm
at the end of cone.
It uses x-ray film (without film) or sensor for imaging purpose as detector.
Dental Radiography 
B) Dental (OPG)
  Both film and Tube head rotate around the patient:
The X-ray tube rotates around the patient head in one direction and the film
rotates in the opposite direction, while the patient sits (or stands) in a
stationary position.
  The collimator used in the panoramic x-ray machine is a lead plate with a
narrow vertical slit.
  The Tube head always rotates behind the patient head as the film rotates in
front of the patient.
  Tube potential 85-90 kV
  Tube current: 4-15 mA
  Exposure time : 12 s (typically standard OPG scan)
0.16-3.2 s (cephalometric projection)
  Flat panoramic cassette 15 cm x 30cm
Dental Radiography 
C) Dental (CBCT)
  Dental Cone Beam CT scanner uses a cone shaped x-ray beam
rather than a conventional linear fan beam, as in the case of
common CT, to provide images of the skull bony structures.
  Tube potential: 85-90 kV
  Tube current: 4-15 mA
  Leakage from tube housing: less than 1.0 mGy in one hour at 1m
from focus of Dental Cone Beam CT scanner.
Bone Mineral Densitometry Equipment
  Bone density or bone mineral density (BMD) is the
amount of bone mineral in bone tissue.
  Bone density scanning, also called dual-energy x-ray
absorptiometry (DEXA) or bone densitometry.
  Two x-ray beams with different energies are aimed at
the patient s bones. When soft tissue absorption is
subtracted out, the BMD can be determined.
  Tube potential : 80-140 kV
  Tube current : 1.5-7 mA
  Bone density testing is used to assess the strength of
the bones and the probability of fracture in persons at
risk for osteoporosis.

Computed Tomography
  Computed Tomography (CT) was introduced into clinical
practice in 1972 and revolutionized X-ray imaging by
providing high quality images which reproduced
transverse cross sections of the body.
  The technique offered in particular improved low
contrast resolution for better visualization of soft tissue,
but with relatively high absorbed radiation dose.
  CT uses a rotating X-ray tube, with the beam in the form
of a thin slice (about 0.5 - 10 mm).
  The  image  is a simple array of X-ray intensity, and
many hundreds of these are used to make the CT
image, which is a  slice  through the patient.
Computed Tomography
Helical Spiral (CT)
  If the X  ray tube can rotate constantly, the patient can then be moved continuously through the beam, making the
examination much faster.
  For helical scanners to work, the X  ray tube must rotate continuously.
  Helical CT imaging allows for the continuous movement of the CT Couch during imaging.
  Scanning Geometry
X-ray beam
Table movement
  Continuous Data Acquisition and Table Feed
Computed Tomography
Generator
  High frequency, 30 - 70 kW
X- ray tube
  Rotating anode, high thermal capacity: 3-7 MHU
  Dual focal spot sizes: about 0.8 and 1.4 mm
Gantry
  Aperture: > 70 cm of diameter
  Detectors: solid state; > 600 detectors
  Scanning time: <1 s, 1 - 4 s
  Slice thickness: 0.5 - 10 mm
  Spiral scanning: up to 1400 mm
Computed Tomography
  Computed Tomography (CT) images are produced by passing
x-rays through the body, at a large number of angles, by
rotating the x-ray tube around the body.
  Multiple linear array detectors, opposite the x-ray source,
collect the transmission projection data. The numerous data
points collected in this manner are synthesized by a computer
into a tomographic image of the patient.
  The term tomography refers to a picture (graph) of a slice
(tomo).
  CT is transmission technique that results in images of individual
slices of tissue in the patient.
  The advantage of a tomographic image over projection image
is its ability to display the anatomy in a slice of tissue in the
absence of over or underlying structures .
Typical layout of CT room
Typical Technical Parameters of Diagnostic X-ray Equipment
Sr. No. Type of diagnostic x-ray Maximum operating Maximum operating
equipment potential (kVp) current (mA)
1 Radiography/Radiography & 150 1100
fluoroscopy
2 C-Arm 110-120 150
3 Dental (intra-oral) 60-70 6-7 (up to 10 mA)
4 Dental (extra-oral) [OPG/CBCT] 85-90 10-15
5 Computed Tomography 140 800
6 Interventional Radiology 150 1250
7 Mammography 49 (Mainly 35 kVp) 200
8 Bone Densitometer 140 5-7
Summary/Learning Outcomes
  This Presentation gives a brief overview of all diagnostic x-ray imaging
modalities.
  This presentation elaborates the technical aspects of various X-ray
imaging modalities, image detection systems, operating parameters and
image properties of medical diagnostic X-ray equipment.
  This presentation will be helpful for the medical professionals associated
with use of diagnostic X-ray equipment for understanding the various x-
ray based imaging modalities and their applications in the field of
medicine.
Expected Questions
Q.1 How radiography examination is performed of a patient?
Ans. Radiography is performed with an x-ray source on one side and an x-ray detector on the other
side of the patient. A short duration pulse of x-rays is emitted by the x-ray tube, a large fraction of
the x-rays interacts in the patient, some of the x-rays pass through the patient (transmitted x-rays)
and reach the detector. These transmitted x-rays form the radiographic image on the film/detector.
Q.2 Why intensifying screens are used in radiographic examinations?
Ans. Intensifying Screens are used to reduce the radiation dose to the patient in diagnostic radiography.
The main function of the Intensifying screen is to convert x-rays falling on it into light.
Q.3 What is the function of image intensifier?
Ans. The function of the x-ray Image Intensifier is to convert an x- ray image into a minified light image.
Expected Questions
Q.4 What is fluoroscopy?
Ans. Fluoroscopy refers to the continuous acquisition of a sequence of x-ray images over time, essentially a real-time x-ray
movie of the patient. It is called dynamic imaging.
Q.5 How occupational exposure can be minimized in interventional radiological procedures?
Ans. Using protective lead aprons
Avoiding direct beam
Maintaining distance
Limiting the total beam on time
Avoiding oblique lateral projections
Q.6 Which type of x-ray radiation is used in mammography examinations?
Ans. Characteristic x-ray radiation is used in mammography examinations.
Q.7 What is the limit of tube housing leakage for dental (intra oral) x-ray equipment?
Ans. Leakage from tube housing shall be leas than 0.25 mGy in one hour at 1m from focus of dental (intra-oral) equipment.
Expected Questions
Q.8 How Dental (OPG) scans of patient is performed?
Ans. In Dental (OPG) scans, the X-ray tube rotates around the patient head in one direction and the film
rotates in the opposite direction, while the patient sits (or stands) in a stationary position.
Q.9 What is the advantage of tomographic image over projection image?
Ans. The advantage of a tomographic image over projection image is its ability to display the anatomy in a
slab (slice) of tissue in the absence of over or underlying structures. It improves its image contrast
Q.10 What do you mean about the contrast of the image?
Ans. Contrast in an image is the difference in the gray scale of the image. It is the difference in darkness of
the image and its surroundings.
References and sources for additional information
  The Essential Physics of Medical Imaging (J. T. Bushberg, J.A. Seibert, E.M.
Leidholdt, J M Boone)
  The Physics of Radiology (H.E. Johns, J.R. Cunnighnam)
  IAEA Presentations on Diagnostic Radiology
List of presentations in the training Module
Basics of Diagnostic X-ray Equipment
Biological effects of Radiations
Medical X-ray imaging techniques
Planning of Diagnostic X-ray facilities
Quality Assurance of X-ray equipment
Quality Assurance of Computed Tomography equipment
Radiation Protection in Diagnostic Radiology Practice
Causes, prevention and investigation of excessive exposures in
diagnostic radiology
Regulatory Requirements for Diagnostic Radiology Practice