(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes
INDEX
CCCCCHHHHHAAAAAPPPPPTTTTTEEEEERRRRR PPPPPAAAAAGGGGGEEEEE NNNNNOOOOO.....
Introduction ... ... 2
What is diabetes? ... ... 3
Who should test themselves for diabetes? ... 7
Controlling diabetes ... ... 9
Myths about diabetes ... ... 11
Diabetes care ... ... 14
Diet in diabetes ... ... 15
Exercise is medicine and fun too! ... 20
Medication ... ... 22
Insulin injection ... ... 24
Injection ... ... 26
Hypoglycemia ... ... 29
Sick day plan ... ... 31
Pregnancy and diabetes ... ... 32
Diabetes and youth ... ... 34
Self monitoring ... ... 35
Long term complications of diabetes and management 36
Psychological factors and diabetes ... 40
Can diabetes be prevented? ... ... 41
Epilogue ... ... 43
Identity Card for a diabetes patients ... 44
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes
INTRODUCTION
Mankind knows DDDDDiiiiiaaaaabbbbbeeeeettttteeeeesssss MMMMMeeeeelllllllllliiiiitttttuuuuusssss since ages. Indian medical
history mentions mmmmmaaaaadddddhhhhhuuuuummmmmeeeeehhhhhaaaaa in CCCCChhhhhaaaaarrrrraaaaakkkkk SSSSSaaaaammmmmhhhhhiiiiitttttaaaaa (500-700 BC) and
has given description of this disorder in detail. The following shlok
describes symptoms of diabetes. Charak mentions a madhumehi person
passes large amount of sweet urine.
In spite of knowing the disease for so long the reaction of the
patient at the time of diagnosis remains almost the same. The moment
of diagnosis brings a lot of unnecessary despair. It is frightening to the
patient. But most of the times this reaction is due to misconception
about the disease. India is going to be a country with largest diabetes
population by year 2025. This would be apparent from following figure.
RRRRRiiiiisssssiiiiinnnnnggggg ppppprrrrreeeeevvvvvaaaaallllleeeeennnnnccccceeeee ooooofffff dddddiiiiiaaaaabbbbbeeeeettttteeeeesssss iiiiinnnnn IIIIInnnnndddddiiiiiaaaaa
YYYYYeeeeeaaaaarrrrr PPPPPrrrrreeeeevvvvvaaaaallllleeeeennnnnccccceeeee %%%%% PPPPPlllllaaaaaccccceeeee
1971 1.2 Cuttak
1972 2.3 New Delhi
1979 3.0 Multicentric
1984 4.7 Tenali
1988 5.0 Kudremath
1992 8.5 Madras
1999 10 to 12 Multicentric
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 2
WHAT IS DIABETES?
Millions of people have diabetes. Even children suffer from this
disease. That is why I feel that you are fortunate that your disease has
been diagnosed at right time. This is one of the most widely studied,
researched and advance areas in the medical field. At present there is
no cure in any of the PATHIES for this disease. But with modern medical
advancement you can definitely live near normal healthy life. We are
here to add life to your life. We care for you and for your diabetes. Your
cooperation is mandatory because A DIABETIC WHO KNOWS THE MOST
ABOUT HIS DISEASE FACES LEAST PROBLEMS. In any disease it is said
that half the battle is won by confidence and I intend to give you
confidence in this booklet, confidence to live with the disease gracefully
and confidence to tackle your problems intelligently.
Let us start with the basic question i.e. WHAT IS DIABETES?
Glucose is essential for providing energy for normal body
functions. In diabetes the blood glucose levels are increased due to
relative or absolute deficiency of insulin. Insulin is a hormone. A Hormone
is a chemical secreted by one of the glands in our body. This gland is
situated in abdomen and is known as pancreas. Insulin acts as a
gatekeeper that allows entry of glucose into the cell.
If the amount of insulin is abnormal or the function of insulin
is at fault excess of glucose accumulates in the body with harmful
effects on the cells of various organs. Diabetes is a metabolic disorder
in which body is unable to handle glucose for its energy requirements.
As we have already discussed, insulin is essential for entry of glucose in
to the cell that is why
1) Cells can not adequately utilise glucose, so
2) Body tries to produce more glucose (gluconeogenisis).
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 3
This is how blood glucose keeps on rising even if there is no
food intake. There are two major types of diabetes. The first type i.e.
insulin dependent diabetes. It can be treated only with insulin as the
main drug. This is common in younger age group of patients. The
second type is non-insulin dependent diabetes (Type II). This is more
common in India. This usually affects people above 40 years of age. This
group can be managed with diet, exercises and oral medications. Some
patients in this group may require insulin sometime later in life.
The comparison of two types of diabetes is shown in following
table.
FFFFFEEEEEAAAAATTTTTUUUUURRRRREEEEE TTTTTYYYYYPPPPPEEEEE IIIII (((((IIIIIDDDDDDDDDDMMMMM))))) TTTTTYYYYYPPPPPEEEEE IIIIIIIIII (((((NNNNNIIIIIDDDDDDDDDDMMMMM)))))
Age of Onset Younger age group Above 30-35 years
Insulin level in Negligible Decreased or High
blood
Bodyweight Underweight or Overweight or
Normal Normal
Usual Treatment Insulin Oral and Insulin
Inheritance Less Significant More Significant
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 4
Uncontrolled diabetes can lead to deleterious effects on
every part of the body if not looked after well at the right time. Even
if one may not, in actual sense suffer the consequences of the disease
today, it needs to be adequately treated. Complacency and neglect is
always dangerous.
Remember that the disease has to be well controlled as it is
critical in leading a normal life.
Poorly controlled diabetes can be a major aggravating
factor for later diabetes complications. Following chart shows some
of these complication risks. This is only to make you aware how
important it is to control diabetes and not to scare you about
this disease.
CCCCCooooommmmmpppppllllliiiiicccccaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn FFFFFrrrrreeeeeqqqqquuuuueeeeennnnncccccyyyyy,,,,, iiiiinnnnn cccccooooommmmmpppppaaaaarrrrriiiiisssssooooonnnnn
tttttooooo nnnnnooooonnnnn-----dddddiiiiiaaaaabbbbbeeeeetttttiiiiicccccsssss
Retinopathy leading to blindness 25 times higher
Kidney disease 15-20 times higher
Foot problems 20-30 times higher
Paralysis 2 times higher
HHHHHeeeeeaaaaarrrrrttttt dddddiiiiissssseeeeeaaaaassssseeeee 2-4 times higher
Let us understand how this disease starts making its impression
on your life. Usually, disease creeps in silently. One comes to know of
it generally during routine blood sugar test for getting licenses, insurance
etc. Sometimes it is detected only during treatment of other concomitant
illness or before surgery.
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 5
Following are the common manifestations of diabetes.
REPORT AS A SURPRISE INCREASED APPETITE AND THIRST
SIGNIFICANT WEIGHTLOSS INFECTIONS IN FOLDS
INCREASED URINATION EXHAUSTION
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 6
Who should test themselves for diabetes?
11111..... EEEEEvvvvveeeeerrrrryyyyybbbbbooooodddddyyyyy wwwwwiiiiittttthhhhh aaaaabbbbbooooovvvvveeeee mmmmmeeeeennnnntttttiiiiiooooonnnnneeeeeddddd sssssyyyyymmmmmppppptttttooooommmmmsssss.....
22222..... CCCCClllllooooossssseeeee rrrrreeeeelllllaaaaatttttiiiiivvvvveeeeesssss ooooofffff DDDDDiiiiiaaaaabbbbbeeeeettttteeeeesssss PPPPPaaaaatttttiiiiieeeeennnnntttttsssss.....
For Type 1 diabetes hereditary factor is less prominent.
If a father is diabetic then the risk to the child is 5-10%. If a mother
is diabetic then the risk is 5%.
Type 2 or NIDDM has significant genetic predisposition. If one parent
has diabetes the risk is 40%. If both parents are diabetic the risk is
33333..... PPPPPrrrrreeeeegggggnnnnnaaaaannnnnttttt wwwwwooooommmmmeeeeennnnn Diabetes is not uncommon due to various
hormonal and metabolic changes during pregnancy.
44444..... TTTTThhhhhooooossssseeeee hhhhhaaaaavvvvviiiiinnnnnggggg hhhhhiiiiiggggghhhhh bbbbblllllooooooooooddddd ppppprrrrreeeeessssssssssuuuuurrrrreeeee,,,,, ooooobbbbbeeeeesssssiiiiitttttyyyyy,,,,, hhhhheeeeeaaaaarrrrrttttt dddddiiiiissssseeeeeaaaaassssseeeee aaaaannnnnddddd
pppppaaaaarrrrraaaaalllllyyyyysssssiiiiisssss eeeeetttttccccc.....
55555..... AAAAA lllllaaaaadddddyyyyy wwwwwhhhhhooooo dddddeeeeellllliiiiivvvvveeeeerrrrreeeeeddddd aaaaa bbbbbaaaaabbbbbyyyyy wwwwweeeeeiiiiiggggghhhhhiiiiinnnnnggggg mmmmmooooorrrrreeeee ttttthhhhhaaaaannnnn 44444.....55555 kkkkkggggg
66666..... AAAAAllllllllll aaaaabbbbbooooovvvvveeeee 4444455555 yyyyyeeeeeaaaaarrrrrsssss ooooofffff aaaaagggggeeeee ssssshhhhhooooouuuuulllllddddd ccccchhhhheeeeeccccckkkkk ttttthhhhheeeeeiiiiirrrrr sssssuuuuugggggaaaaarrrrr llllleeeeevvvvveeeeelllll ooooonnnnnccccceeeee iiiiinnnnn aaaaa
yyyyyeeeeeaaaaarrrrr.....
HHHHHooooowwwww iiiiisssss dddddiiiiiaaaaabbbbbeeeeettttteeeeesssss dddddeeeeettttteeeeecccccttttteeeeeddddd?????
Estimation and interpretation of blood glucose is the only test
for diagnosis of diabetes. World Health Organization (WHO) has laid
down guidelines for diagnosis.
Criteria for diagnosis of diabetes
Fasting Venous plasma glucose > 140 mg/100ml
Two hours after 75 gm ingestion of glucose > 200 mg /100ml
Recently, American Diabetes Association has accepted the fasting
plasma glucose values as >126mg/100ml for diagnosis of diabetes.
HHHHHooooowwwww tttttooooo ppppprrrrreeeeepppppaaaaarrrrreeeee fffffooooorrrrr bbbbblllllooooooooooddddd ttttteeeeesssssttttt?????
How one should prepare for the blood test is also very important.
The person should have normal diet 3-4 days prior to the test.
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 7
PPPPPllllleeeeeaaaaassssseeeee dddddooooo nnnnnooooottttt tttttrrrrryyyyy tttttooooo rrrrreeeeeddddduuuuuccccceeeee sssssuuuuugggggaaaaarrrrr iiiiinnnnntttttaaaaakkkkkeeeee pppppuuuuurrrrrpppppooooossssseeeeelllllyyyyy jjjjjuuuuusssssttttt tttttooooo ssssshhhhhooooowwwww llllleeeeessssssssss
bbbbblllllooooooooooddddd sssssuuuuugggggaaaaarrrrr vvvvvaaaaallllluuuuueeeeesssss..... By this, one is not only fooling the doctor but
oneself also. Actually you are delaying the diagnosis which may prove
very costly later. We want to diagnose the disease so as to take correct
measures to control it at the earliest time. You should remember that by
checking sugar levels doctors are not making you a patient but trying
to avoid serious complications related to high sugars.
AAAAA))))) At the time of blood test the person should be fasting overnight.
He can have water.
BBBBB))))) The next morning fasting blood glucose sample is collected.
CCCCC))))) Two hours after 75g of glucose load or lunch second blood glucose
sample is collected.
AAAAAnnnnnooooottttthhhhheeeeerrrrr wwwwwaaaaayyyyy iiiiisssss ,,,,,tttttooooo gggggiiiiivvvvveeeee pppppooooosssssttttt llllluuuuunnnnnccccchhhhh ppppplllllaaaaasssssmmmmmaaaaa sssssaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee ooooonnnnn ooooonnnnneeeee
dddddaaaaayyyyy aaaaannnnnddddd tttttooooo gggggiiiiivvvvveeeee fffffaaaaassssstttttiiiiinnnnnggggg gggggllllluuuuucccccooooossssseeeee sssssaaaaammmmmpppppllllleeeee nnnnneeeeexxxxxttttt mmmmmooooorrrrrnnnnniiiiinnnnnggggg.....
AAAAA kkkkknnnnnooooowwwwwnnnnn dddddiiiiiaaaaabbbbbeeeeetttttiiiiiccccc pppppaaaaatttttiiiiieeeeennnnnttttt iiiiisssss sssssuuuuuppppppppppooooossssseeeeeddddd tttttooooo fffffooooollllllllllooooowwwww ttttthhhhheeeee nnnnnooooorrrrrmmmmmaaaaalllll
dddddaaaaaiiiiilllllyyyyy rrrrrooooouuuuutttttiiiiinnnnneeeee ooooonnnnn ttttthhhhheeeee dddddaaaaayyyyy ooooofffff bbbbblllllooooooooooddddd ttttteeeeesssssttttt aaaaalllllsssssooooo..... TTTTThhhhhaaaaattttt mmmmmeeeeeaaaaannnnnsssss ttttthhhhheeeee tttttiiiiimmmmmiiiiinnnnngggggsssss
ooooofffff bbbbbrrrrreeeeeaaaaakkkkkfffffaaaaasssssttttt,,,,, mmmmmeeeeedddddiiiiiccccciiiiinnnnneeeeesssss aaaaannnnnddddd ttttthhhhheeeee llllluuuuunnnnnccccchhhhh ssssshhhhhooooouuuuulllllddddd bbbbbeeeee fffffooooollllllllllooooowwwwweeeeeddddd ooooonnnnn ttttthhhhhiiiiisssss
dddddaaaaayyyyy aaaaasssss uuuuusssssuuuuuaaaaalllll..... The doctor can do any modification in the drug and the
doses if the patient follows a regular schedule on the blood test day.
Diabetes management for each person is different. Do not
compare your doses and drugs with other patients. Management of
Diabetes is not only sugar control but much more beyond that. Your
doctor knows your system very well. He will decide what is best for you.
Feel free to ask all your queries to your doctor.
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 8
CONTROLLING DIABETES
WWWWWhhhhhaaaaattttt iiiiisssss ttttthhhhheeeee iiiiidddddeeeeeaaaaa ooooofffff cccccooooonnnnntttttrrrrrooooolllll iiiiinnnnn DDDDDiiiiiaaaaabbbbbeeeeettttteeeeesssss?????
Basic idea of control is that the person should get relief from
the symptoms also, blood biochemistry must be in an acceptable range
so as to avoid acute and long-term complications due to UUUUUNNNNNCCCCCOOOOONNNNNTTTTTRRRRROOOOOLLLLLLLLLLEEEEEDDDDD
DDDDDIIIIISSSSSEEEEEAAAAASSSSSEEEEE. It is important to know the fact that though the blood
biochemistry prescribes normal range of values, they may be little more
or less without causing any alarm signals. Hence one should be aware
of the concept of AAAAACCCCCCCCCCEEEEEPPPPPTTTTTAAAAABBBBBLLLLLEEEEE CCCCCOOOOONNNNNTTTTTRRRRROOOOOLLLLLSSSSS.....
Parameter Good control Acceptable control
Fasting plasma glucose 80-120 mg/dl   140 mg/dl
Post prandial plasma glucose 140-160 mg/dl   180 mg/dl
Glycated haemoglobin <7 % 7 to 8 %
Total cholesterol   180 mg/dl   200 mg/dl
HDL cholesterol   40 mg/dl   35 mg/dl
Triglycerides   150 mg/dl < 180 mg/dl
All these values have to be correlated with other factors like
associated disease, patient s age etc. The management will depend upon
overall health of the patient and certainly not on blood reports! Regular
medical examination includes
  Monthly weight record
  Blood pressure check up
  Blood glucose testing
  Complete lipid profile
  Urine and blood tests for assessing kidney functions
  Tests for evaluation of heart disease
  Examination of eyes
  Evaluation of diabetic foot changes
  Any sexual problems
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 9
Other specialized tests can be suggested depending upon results
of tests mentioned above and the clinical examination by the specialist.
DDDDDIIIIIAAAAABBBBBEEEEETTTTTEEEEESSSSS CCCCCAAAAARRRRREEEEE SSSSSCCCCCHHHHHEEEEEDDDDDUUUUULLLLLEEEEE
EEEEEvvvvveeeeerrrrryyyyy 33333-----66666 MMMMMooooonnnnnttttthhhhhsssss :::::
Regular visits to your doctor, it includes
  Test for plasma glucose levels
  Glycated hemoglobin test (such as HbA1c)
  Examination of injection site.
  Feet: examined without shoes and socks
EEEEEvvvvveeeeerrrrryyyyy YYYYYeeeeeaaaaarrrrr :::::
  Cholesterol: fasting profile including HDL & LDL cholesterol and
triglycerides.
  Kidneys: microalbumin measured
  Eyes: examined through dilated pupils
EEEEEvvvvveeeeerrrrryyyyy 22222-----33333 YYYYYeeeeeaaaaarrrrrsssss :::::
  HDL/cholesterol: if the last reading was normal
  Number of visits to the doctor depend on the control of blood
sugar.
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 10
MYTHS ABOUT DIABETES
To help separate fact from fiction, here are some of the myths
and the actual truth about diabetes.
11111..... AAAAAllllllllll dddddiiiiiaaaaabbbbbeeeeettttteeeeesssss iiiiisssss iiiiinnnnnhhhhheeeeerrrrriiiiittttteeeeeddddd.
Not everyone who gets diabetes inherits it. People tend to inherit
the risk of NIDDM diabetes more than IDDM. You are considered
at risk for developing NIDDM if any first-degree relatives have
diabetes.
22222..... PPPPPeeeeeooooopppppllllleeeee wwwwwiiiiittttthhhhh dddddiiiiiaaaaabbbbbeeeeettttteeeeesssss ssssshhhhhooooouuuuulllllddddd nnnnneeeeevvvvveeeeerrrrr eeeeeaaaaattttt sssssuuuuugggggaaaaarrrrr aaaaannnnnddddd ssssswwwwweeeeeeeeeetttttsssss.
Sugar and sweets do raise your blood glucose, but people with
diabetes can safely eat sugar as part of their meal plan in their
recommended quota of calories occasionally. And just to clear up
another myth, you can t get diabetes from eating too much sugar
if you don t carry any other risk factor for its development.
33333..... YYYYYooooouuuuu cccccaaaaannnnn hhhhhaaaaavvvvveeeee bbbbbooooorrrrrdddddeeeeerrrrrllllliiiiinnnnneeeee dddddiiiiiaaaaabbbbbeeeeettttteeeeesssss fffffooooorrrrr mmmmmaaaaannnnnyyyyy yyyyyeeeeeaaaaarrrrrsssss.
There is no such thing as borderline diabetes. You either have it,
or you don t. You have diabetes if,
a) your fasting blood glucose levels are greater than 126 mg/dl,
b) The random blood glucose is above 200 mg/dl on at least two
occasions.
44444..... OOOOOnnnnnccccceeeee yyyyyooooouuuuu ssssstttttaaaaarrrrrttttt tttttaaaaakkkkkiiiiinnnnnggggg pppppiiiiillllllllllsssss ooooorrrrr iiiiinnnnnsssssuuuuullllliiiiinnnnn,,,,, yyyyyooooouuuuu cccccaaaaannnnn eeeeeaaaaattttt aaaaannnnnyyyyyttttthhhhhiiiiinnnnnggggg ttttthhhhhaaaaattttt
yyyyyooooouuuuu wwwwwaaaaannnnnttttt.....
The pills or insulin that you take for diabetes are more effective
when they don t have to work as hard to lower your blood glucose.
Combining your medicines with a healthy meal plan and physical
activity is the best method of control of diabetes.
55555..... IIIIInnnnnsssssuuuuullllliiiiinnnnn cccccaaaaauuuuussssseeeeesssss iiiiimmmmmpppppooooottttteeeeennnnnccccceeeee.
Some men who have diabetes may become impotent, but not
because they take insulin. Impotence or erectile dysfunction is
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 11
caused by damage to nerves caused by lllllooooonnnnngggggssssstttttaaaaannnnndddddiiiiinnnnnggggg hhhhhiiiiiggggghhhhh bbbbblllllooooooooooddddd
gggggllllluuuuucccccooooossssseeeee..... DDDDDiiiiiaaaaabbbbbeeeeettttteeeeesssss iiiiisssss ooooonnnnneeeee ooooofffff ttttthhhhheeeee mmmmmaaaaannnnnyyyyy rrrrreeeeeaaaaasssssooooonnnnnsssss fffffooooorrrrr gggggeeeeettttttttttiiiiinnnnnggggg
iiiiimmmmmpppppooooottttteeeeennnnnccccceeeee.....
66666..... TTTTThhhhheeeee bbbbbeeeeesssssttttt wwwwwaaaaayyyyy tttttooooo jjjjjuuuuudddddgggggeeeee yyyyyooooouuuuurrrrr bbbbblllllooooooooooddddd sssssuuuuugggggaaaaarrrrr llllleeeeevvvvveeeeelllll iiiiisssss bbbbbyyyyy ttttthhhhheeeee wwwwwaaaaayyyyy ttttthhhhhaaaaattttt
yyyyyooooouuuuu fffffeeeeeeeeeelllll.
Some people have symptoms when their blood glucose is too
high or low, others do not. Because some of the symptoms of
high and low blood glucose are similar, it can be hard to know
what your symptoms mean. The only way to be sure is to check
your blood glucose.
77777..... IIIIIfffff mmmmmyyyyy bbbbblllllooooooooooddddd sssssuuuuugggggaaaaarrrrr iiiiisssss uuuuusssssuuuuuaaaaallllllllllyyyyy ooooovvvvveeeeerrrrr 111118888800000 mmmmmggggg/////dddddlllll ttttthhhhhaaaaattttt mmmmmuuuuusssssttttt bbbbbeeeee
nnnnnooooorrrrrmmmmmaaaaalllll fffffooooorrrrr mmmmmeeeee.....
No. Your usual blood glucose isn t the same as normal blood
glucose. Just because your blood glucose is usually high, does not
mean that this is an acceptable blood glucose level. High blood
glucose levels that are above those recommended goals do damage
to many organs and systems in your body.
88888.....  TTTTThhhhheeeee dddddoooooccccctttttooooorrrrr hhhhhaaaaasssss ppppprrrrreeeeessssscccccrrrrriiiiibbbbbeeeeeddddd mmmmmeeeee iiiiinnnnnsssssuuuuullllliiiiinnnnn..... HHHHHooooowwwwweeeeevvvvveeeeerrrrr IIIII dddddooooo nnnnnooooottttt fffffeeeeeeeeeelllll
sssssiiiiiccccckkkkk aaaaattttt aaaaallllllllll..... SSSSSooooo IIIII wwwwwooooouuuuulllllddddd bbbbbeeeeetttttttttteeeeerrrrr pppppooooossssstttttpppppooooonnnnneeeee tttttaaaaakkkkkiiiiinnnnnggggg iiiiinnnnnsssssuuuuullllliiiiinnnnn aaaaattttt aaaaa lllllaaaaattttteeeeerrrrr
dddddaaaaattttteeeee 
For some people with type 2 diabetes, especially those who are
obese, moderate weight loss and increased physical activity can
lower blood glucose levels so significantly, that insulin injections
are not necessary. But bargaining like this is bad for your health!
When you put off insulin even for a few months, high blood
glucose levels can be doing a lot of damage. Instead, start insulin
as soon as it is recommended so that you can keep your blood
glucose in control. At the same time you can focus on losing
weight and exercising more, with the hope that this will help to
reduce your body s need for insulin injections in the future.
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 12
99999.....  MMMMMyyyyy dddddiiiiiaaaaabbbbbeeeeettttteeeeesssss iiiiisssss mmmmmuuuuuccccchhhhh mmmmmooooorrrrreeeee ssssseeeeerrrrriiiiiooooouuuuusssss ttttthhhhhaaaaannnnn sssssooooommmmmeeeee pppppeeeeeooooopppppllllleeeee bbbbbeeeeecccccaaaaauuuuussssseeeee
IIIII hhhhhaaaaavvvvveeeee tttttooooo tttttaaaaakkkkkeeeee iiiiinnnnnsssssuuuuullllliiiiinnnnn iiiiinnnnnjjjjjeeeeeccccctttttiiiiiooooonnnnn wwwwwhhhhhiiiiillllleeeee ooooottttthhhhheeeeerrrrrsssss dddddooooo nnnnnooooottttt tttttaaaaakkkkkeeeee iiiiittttt 
Many people avoid insulin because they believe it is a good way
to keep their diabetes from becoming too  serious.  When you
really think about it, that seems silly, doesn t it? If your blood
glucose levels are high, whether you are taking insulin or not, the
problem is serious and needs to be addressed. If you avoid insulin
it doesn t make the high blood glucose less serious, it just makes
it easier for you to ignore the problem. Certainly when you begin
taking insulin, your diabetes does not suddenly become more
serious. Rather, you are now using a new and powerful tool to
address a problem that has been serious all along. It would be a
beginning towards a better life.
1111100000..... TTTTTyyyyypppppeeeee 22222 ooooorrrrr NNNNNIIIIIDDDDDDDDDDMMMMM dddddiiiiiaaaaabbbbbeeeeettttteeeeesssss iiiiisssss nnnnnooooottttt ssssseeeeerrrrriiiiiooooouuuuusssss.....
This is never true. All types of diabetes are serious, and need to
be taken seriously by people who have it and their families.
1111111111.....  TTTTThhhhheeeee fffffiiiiirrrrrsssssttttt ppppprrrrreeeeessssscccccrrrrriiiiippppptttttiiiiiooooonnnnn ooooofffff iiiiinnnnnsssssuuuuullllliiiiinnnnn iiiiisssss ttttthhhhheeeee ppppprrrrreeeeessssscccccrrrrriiiiippppptttttiiiiiooooonnnnn fffffooooorrrrr rrrrreeeeesssssttttt ooooofffff
yyyyyooooouuuuurrrrr llllliiiiifffffeeeee .....
It is true that most people who take insulin continue to do so for
the rest of their lives. But does it really matter? Taking insulin
injection is certainly not like an addiction to drugs or narcotics.
You are always in control of what you are doing and it is for
running your body system correctly. Some people do manage to
make the necessary lifestyle changes so that insulin can be safely
discontinued without a rise in blood glucose levels. TTTTThhhhheeeeerrrrreeeee iiiiisssss
dddddeeeeefffffiiiiinnnnniiiiittttteeeeelllllyyyyy nnnnnooooo pppppoooooiiiiinnnnnttttt iiiiinnnnn aaaaavvvvvoooooiiiiidddddiiiiinnnnnggggg ooooonnnnneeeee ooooorrrrr tttttwwwwwooooo ppppprrrrriiiiiccccckkkkksssss ooooofffff iiiiinnnnnjjjjjeeeeeccccctttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
aaaaattttt ttttthhhhheeeee cccccooooosssssttttt ooooofffff yyyyyooooouuuuurrrrr llllliiiiifffffeeeee!!!!!
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 13
DIABETES CARE
NNNNNOOOOOWWWWW YYYYYOOOOOUUUUU HHHHHAAAAAVVVVVEEEEE SSSSSOOOOOMMMMMEEEEE IIIIIDDDDDEEEEEAAAAA AAAAABBBBBOOOOOUUUUUTTTTT YYYYYOOOOOUUUUURRRRR DDDDDIIIIISSSSSEEEEEAAAAASSSSSEEEEE.....
The golden rule of diabetes care is that   You are the most
important person even more that the doctor in management of
diabetes . Management of diabetes can best be described under following
steps.
  Diet
  Exercise
  Oral Medication
  Insulin Injection
Let us get more familiarized with these steps as they are going
to play an important role in your goal i.e.   living a healthy life with the
disease .
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 14
DIET IN DIABETES
This means that many diseases and symptoms are managed by
proper diet. Even hundreds of medicines may not work or show effect
unless certain rules regarding diet are adhered to.
This is the most important area in the management of the
disease. You have lots of people other than the doctor in your periphery
to prescribe your diet. But remember that you are going to decide your
diet in consultation with your dddddoooooccccctttttooooorrrrr aaaaannnnnddddd ttttthhhhheeeee dddddiiiiieeeeetttttiiiiiccccciiiiiaaaaannnnn..... You may be
bothered with lots of  Don ts . But you will realize that you can eat
practically everything provided you know what you are eating and how
much you are eating. TTTTTrrrrraaaaadddddiiiiitttttiiiiiooooonnnnnaaaaalllll IIIIInnnnndddddiiiiiaaaaannnnn dddddiiiiieeeeettttt wwwwwiiiiittttthhhhh llllliiiiittttttttttllllleeeee mmmmmooooodddddiiiiifffffiiiiicccccaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn iiiiisssss
 IIIIIDDDDDEEEEEAAAAALLLLL DDDDDIIIIIAAAAABBBBBEEEEETTTTTIIIIICCCCC DDDDDIIIIIEEEEETTTTT ..... Diabetic diet does not deprive you of many
foodstuffs. You do not have to make major changes in your food habits
in particular and life style in general other than avoid sugars (mainly
SWEETS) and quantity of FAT in your daily diet. YYYYYooooouuuuu nnnnneeeeeeeeeeddddd tttttooooo bbbbbeeeee jjjjjuuuuusssssttttt
llllliiiiittttttttttllllleeeee mmmmmooooorrrrreeeee dddddiiiiisssssccccciiiiipppppllllliiiiinnnnneeeeeddddd iiiiinnnnn llllliiiiimmmmmiiiiitttttiiiiinnnnnggggg yyyyyooooouuuuurrrrr fffffooooooooooddddd iiiiinnnnntttttaaaaakkkkkeeeeesssss..... You can eat
everything in your allotted quota of calories in consultation with your
doctor and dietician. You can eat rice, potatoes, fruits etc. as other
people. One fruit per day can be eaten without any problems. You just
need to get carbohydrates, proteins, fats and vitamins in right proportion.....
RRRRReeeeemmmmmeeeeemmmmmbbbbbeeeeerrrrr ttttthhhhhaaaaattttt ssssstttttrrrrriiiiicccccttttt bbbbbuuuuuttttt uuuuunnnnnsssssuuuuupppppeeeeerrrrrvvvvviiiiissssseeeeeddddd dddddiiiiieeeeettttt cccccooooonnnnntttttrrrrrooooolllll cccccaaaaannnnn aaaaalllllsssssooooo bbbbbeeeee mmmmmooooorrrrreeeee
hhhhhaaaaarrrrrmmmmmfffffuuuuulllll.....
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 15
Depending on your ideal body weight and calorie requirement
diet can be tailor-made for you. The design of the plan can easily be
made by keeping in mind your likes and dislikes. You can have variety
of food in  Exchange Food Plan . Your doctor and dietician can be
consulted for this innovation. Diet control does not mean weight
reduction. Some diabetics need to gain weight. This can be done under
your doctor s guidance.
RRRRReeeeemmmmmeeeeemmmmmbbbbbeeeeerrrrr
Do not add too much oil as cooking medium.
Do not add sugar or jaggery in vegetable preparations.
HHHHHaaaaavvvvveeeee iiiiinnnnn AAAAAMMMMMPPPPPLLLLLEEEEE AAAAAMMMMMOOOOOUUUUUNNNNNTTTTT wwwwwhhhhheeeeennnnneeeeevvvvveeeeerrrrr yyyyyooooouuuuu fffffeeeeeeeeeelllll hhhhhuuuuunnnnngggggrrrrryyyyy.....
(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:57) Salads: cucumber, cabbage, lettuce, onion, tomato, capsicum, and
radish.
(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:57) Plain lemon juice with water.
(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:57) Clear soups (without additives like starch or bread pieces).
(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:57) Thin buttermilk without cream or sugar.
(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:57)(cid:57) Sprouted cereals.
WWWWWHHHHHAAAAATTTTT YYYYYOOOOOUUUUU SSSSSHHHHHOOOOOUUUUULLLLLDDDDD AAAAAVVVVVOOOOOIIIIIDDDDD?????
X Jams, jellies, soft drinks.
X Sugar, jaggery, honey
X Oily foodstuff
X Fried food
X Alcohol and other beverages
X Concentrated sweets
X Fasting for any reason
X Yellow part of egg
X Liver, kidney and brain parts in non-vegetarian food
X Prawns
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 16
WWWWWHHHHHAAAAATTTTT YYYYYOOOOOUUUUU SSSSSHHHHHOOOOOUUUUULLLLLDDDDD RRRRREEEEESSSSSTTTTTRRRRRIIIIICCCCCTTTTT?????
  Oil consumption
  Salt
WWWWWHHHHHYYYYY SSSSSAAAAALLLLLTTTTT SSSSSHHHHHOOOOOUUUUULLLLLDDDDD BBBBBEEEEE RRRRREEEEESSSSSTTTTTRRRRRIIIIICCCCCTTTTTEEEEEDDDDD?????
Diabetics are more prone to get high blood pressure and heart
diseases. Since these disorders are also related to the dietary conditions,
you will have to strike a correct balance of different components of
food. You can make food palatable with reduced salt by adding tamarind,
garlic, fresh lime, onion, dry mango powder (aamchur) etc.
FFFFFOOOOOOOOOODDDDD EEEEEXXXXXCCCCCHHHHHAAAAANNNNNGGGGGEEEEE
This means you can choose what you can eat from a group so
that diet does not become monotonous and you can enjoy all varieties
of food listed below.
CCCCCEEEEERRRRREEEEEAAAAALLLLL EEEEEXXXXXCCCCCHHHHHAAAAANNNNNGGGGGEEEEE
(70 calories at each serving)
  Rice - 1 vati*
  Bread 2 pieces
  Khichadi - 3/4 vati (Rice +mung dal)
  Idli - 2 (medium size)
  Chapati - 2 (small size or fulka)
  Bhakri - one (small size) from bajra or jowar
  Thalipeeth from any atta (2 table spoon flat)
  Dal preparation (cooked) - 3/4 vati
  Chana preparation (cooked) - 3/4 vati
(* - Vati is a common unit in Indian kitchen equal to 125 ml volume)
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 17
VVVVVEEEEEGGGGGEEEEETTTTTAAAAABBBBBLLLLLEEEEE EEEEEXXXXXCCCCCHHHHHAAAAANNNNNGGGGGEEEEE
(40 calories)
A) Cabbage, cucumber, cauliflower, brinjol, tomato, lady s finger, beans,
padwal, drumsticks, pumpkin, methi, radish
B) (1/2 - 3/4 vati cooked) Carrot, beet root, green peas, suran, potato
NNNNNOOOOONNNNN VVVVVEEEEEGGGGGEEEEETTTTTEEEEERRRRRIIIIIAAAAANNNNN FFFFFOOOOOOOOOODDDDD
(70 calories of 30 gms of each of the followings)
  Beef
  Lamb
  Pork
  Fish
  Chicken
(Avoid yellow part of egg, liver, kidney and brain parts, and prawns).
DDDDDAAAAAIIIIIRRRRRYYYYY PPPPPRRRRROOOOODDDDDUUUUUCCCCCTTTTTSSSSS (((((4444400000 cccccaaaaalllll)))))
  Milk (from cow) - 50ml
  Skimmed milk - 1 cup
  Curd - 1/2 vati
  Cheese - one cube small sized
  Paneer - 1 piece
FFFFFRRRRRUUUUUIIIIITTTTTSSSSS (((((5555500000 cccccaaaaalllll)))))
Banana 1/2 Anjir (Fig) 2 Papaya 1/2 vati
(medium)
Peru (Guava) 1 Orange 1 Pineapple 1/2 vati
Custard apple 1/2 Dates 2-3 Grapes 10-12
(sitafal) (Khajur)
Apple 1/2 Peach 1 Coconut 1/2 cup
water
Mango pieces 2 Water 3/2cup
(small) melon
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 18
It is obvious from these lists that you can enjoy wide variety of
foods. Your diet should not be monotonous. You are also entitled to
delicious and varied food as other Healthy individuals.
AAAAARRRRRTTTTTIIIIIFFFFFIIIIICCCCCIIIIIAAAAALLLLL SSSSSWWWWWEEEEEEEEEETTTTTNNNNNEEEEERRRRR
These are synthetically prepared agents. They are 200 to 300
times sweeter than sugar. These can be safely used in tea, coffee and
even in preparing sweets.
Following table would help you in choosing the various items
as per their nutritional value.
CCCCCOOOOOMMMMMMMMMMOOOOONNNNN FFFFFOOOOOOOOOODDDDD IIIIITTTTTEEEEEMMMMMSSSSS IIIIINNNNN IIIIINNNNNDDDDDIIIIIAAAAANNNNN KKKKKIIIIITTTTTCCCCCHHHHHEEEEENNNNN AAAAANNNNNDDDDD TTTTTHHHHHEEEEEIIIIIRRRRR
NNNNNUUUUUTTTTTRRRRRIIIIITTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNNAAAAALLLLL VVVVVAAAAALLLLLUUUUUEEEEE
IIIIITTTTTEEEEEMMMMM WWWWWEEEEEIIIIIGGGGGHHHHHTTTTT (((((gggggmmmmm))))) CCCCCAAAAALLLLLOOOOORRRRRIIIIIEEEEESSSSS
POHA 100 180
DHOKLA 100 120
IDLI 100 130
UPMA 100 200
PIZZA 60 140
UTTAPA 100 350
SAMOSA 100 250
CHIVDA 100 420
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 19
EXERCISE IS A MEDICINE AND FUN TOO!
Importance of EXERCISE in the management of diabetes is
given prominence in CHARAK SAMHITA in following shlok.
This means that a lazy, obese person and a person who eats
lots of fat is attacked by death very easily.
Exercise is an important aspect of diabetes management. How
exactly does exercise help in diabetes control?
  It improves glucose control by peripheral utilization of glucose by
tissues
  It improves blood circulation
  Tones up your heart, lungs and other muscles
  It helps you to keep healthy
  It is fun and enjoyable
  It helps to reduce weight
  It increases physical stamina
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 20
1. A diabetic person without any associated complication can do any
type of exercise.
2. Start the exercise programme with minimum time and intensity.
Then try to achieve the maximum within your limits.
3. Exercise should be done regularly for at least for 30-35 minutes
per day & atleast 5 days a week.
4. Try to do the same exercise every day. No frequent EXCHANGE
programme should be tried here.
5. The exercise should not be changed in its intensity either as that
will create problems.
KKKKKeeeeeeeeeeppppp sssssooooommmmmeeeee sssssuuuuugggggaaaaarrrrr hhhhhaaaaannnnndddddyyyyy,,,,, tttttooooo tttttaaaaakkkkkeeeee cccccaaaaarrrrreeeee ooooofffff hhhhhyyyyypppppoooooggggglllllyyyyyccccceeeeemmmmmiiiiiaaaaa iiiiifffff iiiiittttt
oooooccccccccccuuuuurrrrrsssss..... Wear loose cotton clothes. Do not exercise bare-footed.
Brisk walk, jogging, cycling are good exercises. Before starting
the exercise programme discuss with your doctor for any special
instructions. For many diabetics who have associated problems of foot
or osteoarthritis walking may be difficult. They can consult the doctor
for upper limb exercises or exercises in lying down position where weight
bearing can be avoided.
Yogic exercises are also helpful.
TTTTTaaaaabbbbbllllleeeee ssssshhhhhooooowwwwwiiiiinnnnnggggg cccccaaaaalllllooooorrrrriiiiieeeeesssss bbbbbuuuuurrrrrnnnnnttttt bbbbbyyyyy eeeeexxxxxeeeeerrrrrccccciiiiissssseeeeesssss pppppeeeeerrrrr hhhhhooooouuuuurrrrr
SSSSSllllleeeeeeeeeepppppiiiiinnnnnggggg aaaaannnnnddddd lllllyyyyyiiiiinnnnnggggg dddddooooowwwwwnnnnn 6666655555-----7777700000
Standing quietly 100-120
Typing or deskwork 100-120
Level walking 120-240
Washing utensils and clothes 150-200
Sweeping and swabbing 150-200
Cycling 6km/hour 250-300
Brisk walk 300-500
Swimming 500-600
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 21
MEDICATION
In some patients diet control and exercises are not adequate
for achieving acceptable blood glucose levels. These patients
require medication either in the form of oral drugs or
insulin injections.
Diet and exercise need to be continued as a part of treatment
of diabetes. Basically, oral medication is of following major types:
sulfonylurea (available commercially as daonil, Glynase, euglucon and
dimicron) and biguinides (marketed as Glyciphase, Walaphase). These
have different modes of action. The doctor will decide the suitable type
and dose of medicine. You may need one or more tablets if the control
of your blood glucose is not possible by following a healthy eating plan
or by being active. These tablets lower blood glucose, in different ways.
For example, sulfonylurea lowers blood glucose by helping the pancreas
make more insulin. Sulfonylureas have to be taken half an hour before
food. Whereas, biguanides reduce blood glucose by decreasing the liver s
production of glucose. It also causes the muscle to use glucose more
efficiently. The two other new types of medicines like Acarbose and
insulin sensitizers work in other ways. Acarbose reduces absorption of
glucose from intestine. It has to be taken just before first bite of lunch
and dinner. These medicines have specific indications. It is again important
to remind you at this stage that nnnnnooooo tttttwwwwwooooo pppppaaaaatttttiiiiieeeeennnnntttttsssss aaaaarrrrreeeee sssssiiiiimmmmmiiiiilllllaaaaarrrrr..... HHHHHeeeeennnnnccccceeeee dddddooooo
nnnnnooooottttt cccccooooommmmmpppppaaaaarrrrreeeee yyyyyooooouuuuurrrrr dddddooooossssseeeeesssss ooooorrrrr tttttyyyyypppppeeeee ooooofffff tttttaaaaabbbbbllllleeeeettttt wwwwwiiiiittttthhhhh ooooottttthhhhheeeeerrrrr pppppaaaaatttttiiiiieeeeennnnntttttsssss..... Do not
take tablets prescribed to some other patient when you run out of stock
or while away from home. Always carry sufficient quantity of your
medicine with you.
These tablets should be avoided in pregnancy, diabetes
associated with severe heart diseases, kidney and liver diseases or young
diabetics. After years of use sometimes oral medicine may not show
required effects on blood sugar. This is called primary or secondary drug
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 22
failure. The patient may not respond to tablets then. This is because the
oral drugs can work if the pancreas make enough to let the pills work.
The pills do not stop working, the pancreas does. If the pancreas no
longer make insulin then one must take insulin injection. RRRRReeeeemmmmmeeeeemmmmmbbbbbeeeeerrrrr
wwwwwhhhhhaaaaattttt iiiiisssss mmmmmooooosssssttttt iiiiimmmmmpppppooooorrrrrtttttaaaaannnnnttttt iiiiisssss tttttooooo cccccooooonnnnntttttrrrrrooooolllll ooooofffff bbbbblllllooooooooooddddd sssssuuuuugggggaaaaarrrrr llllleeeeevvvvveeeeelllllsssss..... Eating
healthy and staying active is still a must even if you are taking medicine.
Consider your oral drugs as  extra help  to control your blood
glucose. More than likely you need to shed a few kilograms, improve
your blood fats and blood pressure. Healthy eating and exercise helps
you achieve these goals as well. And if you lose enough weight you
maybe able to take less tablets or no tablets at all. RRRRReeeeemmmmmeeeeemmmmmbbbbbeeeeerrrrr ttttthhhhhaaaaattttt iiiiittttt
mmmmmaaaaayyyyy ooooonnnnnlllllyyyyy tttttaaaaakkkkkeeeee aaaaa fffffeeeeewwwww kkkkkiiiiilllllooooosssss oooooffffffffff yyyyyooooouuuuurrrrr bbbbbooooodddddyyyyy tttttooooo gggggeeeeettttt rrrrriiiiiddddd ooooofffff dddddiiiiiaaaaabbbbbeeeeettttteeeeesssss!!!!!
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 23
INSULIN-INJECTION
IIIIINNNNNSSSSSUUUUULLLLLIIIIINNNNN TTTTTHHHHHEEEEERRRRRAAAAAPPPPPYYYYY
There are misconceptions and phobia in minds of patients and
sometimes even doctors about insulin. PPPPPrrrrreeeeessssscccccrrrrriiiiippppptttttiiiiiooooonnnnn ooooofffff iiiiinnnnnsssssuuuuullllliiiiinnnnn dddddoooooeeeeesssss nnnnnooooottttt
mmmmmeeeeeaaaaannnnn ttttthhhhhaaaaattttt yyyyyooooouuuuurrrrr dddddiiiiissssseeeeeaaaaassssseeeee iiiiisssss ssssseeeeevvvvveeeeerrrrreeeee. Any type of Diabetes Mellitus is a
major illness. It needs to be treated with whatever possible means. The
fear of insulin is due to its mode of delivery which is through injection.
But with newer types of injection syringes and with right technique one
can have minimum pain while taking the injection.
IIIIInnnnnsssssuuuuullllliiiiinnnnn iiiiisssss nnnnneeeeeeeeeedddddeeeeeddddd bbbbbyyyyy
1. Young diabetics
2. Very high blood sugar levels
3. Pregnant diabetic women
4. Diabetics who have to undergo operative procedures and/or other
serious illness.
5. Diabetics with associated complications like heart or kidney disease
may require insulin in addition to oral tablets.
6. Infections like tuberculosis or hepatitis in presence of diabetes.
Never refuse to take insulin if your doctor advises. There are
definitely more advantages of being on insulin therapy in certain
situations. You have to take insulin in the form of an injection not
because of the seriousness of the problem, but because it is the only
mode by which insulin can be administered at the moment.
TTTTTYYYYYPPPPPEEEEESSSSS OOOOOFFFFF IIIIINNNNNSSSSSUUUUULLLLLIIIIINNNNN
Two main types of insulin are available. The first type is fast
acting. The action starts within 1/2 to 1 hour after taking it. Hence itis
taken 1/2 to 1 hour before consuming food. The second type is cloudy
type of insulin. It is an intermediate acting insulin. The action starts
3-4 hours after injection and lasts for 18-20 hours. Peak effect is
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 24
seenafter 10-12 hours. Both these insulins are available in premixed
forms as well in different ratios to make it most convenient for the
patient.
TTTTTyyyyypppppeeeeesssss aaaaannnnnddddd DDDDDuuuuurrrrraaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnn ooooofffff AAAAAccccctttttiiiiiooooonnnnn ooooofffff IIIIInnnnnsssssuuuuullllliiiiinnnnnsssss
TTTTTyyyyypppppeeeee ooooofffff IIIIInnnnnsssssuuuuullllliiiiinnnnn AAAAAppppppppppeeeeeaaaaarrrrraaaaannnnnccccceeeee BBBBBeeeeegggggiiiiinnnnnsssss PPPPPeeeeeaaaaakkkkk AAAAAccccctttttiiiiivvvvviiiiitttttyyyyy AAAAAllllllllll GGGGGooooonnnnneeeee
Analogue Clear 10-15 30-60 4 hours
insulin minutes minutes
Regular Clear 30 minutes 2 - 4 hours 4 - 8 hours
NPH Cloudy 2 - 4 hours 6 - 8 hours 12 - 15 hours
NPH/Regular Cloudy 30 minutes Varies 18 - 24 hours
70/30 or 50/50
are common
mixes
IIIIINNNNNSSSSSUUUUULLLLLIIIIINNNNN PPPPPRRRRREEEEESSSSSEEEEERRRRRVVVVVAAAAATTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNN
Storage of insulin is very important for its optimum action.
Insulin should be stored preferably in fridge (on the door at the bottom
level). It should not be frozen. It should not be exposed to extreme
temperatures like shelf near the cooking stove in the kitchen or geyser
in the bathroom. Constant sunlight at the windows can cause problem
if the bottle of insulin has been left there. Insulin can be kept safety for
15 - 30 days at room temperature in relatively cooler place also.
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 25
INJECTION
HHHHHooooowwwww tttttooooo ppppprrrrreeeeepppppaaaaarrrrreeeee iiiiinnnnnsssssuuuuullllliiiiinnnnn ssssshhhhhooooottttt ?????
Wash your hands thoroughly. Roll the insulin vial in both hands.
Do not shake it.
Take cloudy insulin or intermediate acting insulin vial. Clean the
top with a spirit swab.
Insert the needle in the vial and push air inside the vial, in an
amount equal to units of insulin you are required to take. Take out
EMPTY syringe without any insulin in it. Now take vial of clear or rapid
acting insulin. Push air inside the vial, amount equal to units of your
insulin dose. Make vial-syringe unit upside down. Just pull back the
plunger to withdraw clear insulin. Take out the needle.
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 26
Now insert needle in cloudy insulin vial. Pull the piston back so
that insulin flows inside the syringe without getting mixed inside the
vial. Remove air bubbles by firmly flicking the syringe.
You are now ready with insulin shot.
Clean the area where you want to inject. Pinch the skin fold.
Hold syringe like a pen with thumb and middle finger. Press the plunger
with index finger, straight in the skinfold. You have now injected
successfully.
IIIIINNNNNJJJJJEEEEECCCCCTTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNN DDDDDEEEEEVVVVVIIIIICCCCCEEEEE
Insulin syringes are available in markets that are disposable and
capable of offering near  painfree  injections. Insulin portable pens,
insulin jets and portable insulin pumps are also available. The pen like
instruments are available now in the market which allow you to dial
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 27
the dose and inject. These pens have following advantages:
  They assure a freedom from syringes.
  They are very accurate.
  They increase the self confidence of the patients and assure them a
near normal social life.
SSSSSiiiiittttteeeeesssss fffffooooorrrrr iiiiinnnnnsssssuuuuullllliiiiinnnnn iiiiinnnnnjjjjjeeeeeccccctttttiiiiiooooonnnnn Insulin injection is easy to take. Following
picture depicts various sites where injection can be taken.
TTTTThhhhheeeee aaaaarrrrreeeeeaaaaasssss mmmmmaaaaarrrrrkkkkkeeeeeddddd rrrrreeeeeddddd cccccaaaaannnnn bbbbbeeeee uuuuussssseeeeeddddd fffffooooorrrrr iiiiinnnnnsssssuuuuullllliiiiinnnnn iiiiinnnnnjjjjjeeeeeccccctttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 28
HYPOGLYCEMIA
Hypoglycemia means sudden lowering of blood sugar. When
you are on medication for diabetes, lowering of the blood sugar level
is the normal expected response of the drug. This is not a side effect
of the medicine but sometimes, for the reasons given below, this level
of blood glucose is lowered significantly.
HHHHHooooowwwww tttttooooo rrrrreeeeecccccooooogggggnnnnniiiiissssseeeee hhhhhyyyyypppppoooooggggglllllyyyyyccccceeeeemmmmmiiiiiaaaaa?????
Following symptoms can be correlated with hypoglycemia.
  Sudden feeling of hunger and cramps in stomach
  Unexplained uneasiness
  Sweating
  Headache
  Blurring of vision
  Tremulousness
  Palpitation
  Abnormal behaviour
  Sudden mood changes
If it is not treated at proper time it may progress to deterioration
in consciousness, convulsions, paralysis and coma. All these symptoms
of hypoglycemia are avoidable if it is treated immediately.
CCCCCAAAAAUUUUUSSSSSEEEEESSSSS OOOOOFFFFF HHHHHYYYYYPPPPPOOOOOGGGGGLLLLLYYYYYCCCCCEEEEEMMMMMIIIIIAAAAA
  Missed food
  Excess of diabetes medicine dose
  Sudden unaccustomed exercise
  Alcohol consumption
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 29
TTTTTRRRRREEEEEAAAAATTTTTMMMMMEEEEENNNNNTTTTT OOOOOFFFFF HHHHHYYYYYPPPPPOOOOOGGGGGLLLLLYYYYYCCCCCEEEEEMMMMMIIIIIAAAAA
As soon as you get warning symptoms take sugar, fruit juice,
chocolates or some sweets immediately. If it is left untreated patient
may require injection of glucose or glucagon. Report this event to the
doctor so as to adjust doses of medicine.
A glucometer is very handy to keep a record of glucose levels.
It would help to monitor the hypoglycemic conditions as well.
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 30
SICK DAY PLAN
Simple illnesses like viral fever, diarrhea, flu etc are as common
in diabetics as in non-diabetic persons. When you are sick body releases
hormones that help to fight against disease. But these hormones may
raise blood glucose levels. If you are not having enough insulin to take
care of this situation, body will release lot of ketone bodies. This can be
very harmful.
  Check your blood glucose and urine ketose more often when you
are sick
  Do not skip total insulin dose or medicine even if you are not
eating properly
  Do not exercise on a sick day
  If the urine sugars are absent and ketone bodies are present, it
indicates starvation ketoses. You need to eat more and take more
fluids in this situation.
SSSSSiiiiiccccckkkkk-----DDDDDaaaaayyyyy FFFFFooooooooooddddd &&&&& FFFFFllllluuuuuiiiiidddddsssss WWWWWiiiiittttthhhhh AAAAAbbbbbooooouuuuuttttt 1111155555 GGGGGrrrrraaaaammmmmsssss ooooofffff CCCCCaaaaarrrrrbbbbbooooohhhhhyyyyydddddrrrrraaaaattttteeeee
1 Fruit Juice glass 1/2 Cup Ice Cream
1 Slice Toast or Bread 1/2 Cup Cooked Cereal
1 Cup Soup 1/2 Cup Mashed Potatoes
1 Cup Sports Drink 1/3 Can Regular Soft Drink
1/2 Cup Fruit Juice 1/3 Cup Rice
1/4 Cup Sherbet 1/3 Cup curds
1/4 Cup Pudding 1/4 Cup Applesauce
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 31
PREGNANCY AND DIABETES
All those related to the field of diabetology, as patient or as a
health care professional should thank Best and Banting (1921) for their
discovery of insulin. It was next to impossible for a pregnant diabetic
woman to survive before availability of insulin. But now the scenario has
totally changed. With medical advancement a diabetic lady can have a
normal pregnancy and expect a normal child. Its also possible for a
nondiabetic pregnant woman to get diabetes during the course of her
pregnancy. This entity is called as gggggeeeeessssstttttaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnnaaaaalllll dddddiiiiiaaaaabbbbbeeeeettttteeeeesssss and is not an
uncommon occurrence.
WWWWWhhhhhaaaaattttt iiiiisssss gggggeeeeessssstttttaaaaatttttiiiiiooooonnnnnaaaaalllll dddddiiiiiaaaaabbbbbeeeeettttteeeeesssss mmmmmeeeeelllllllllliiiiitttttuuuuusssss (((((GGGGGDDDDDMMMMM)))))?????
Appearance of diabetes during the course of pregnancy is called
as GDM. This condition is generally asymptotic. But it is a very serious
condition if left untreated. Uncontrolled diabetes is a major health hazard
for both the mother and the baby in the womb. The good news is that
if it is well managed, than the course of pregnancy and outcome is
almost same as non-diabetic pregnancies.
CCCCCUUUUURRRRRRRRRREEEEENNNNNTTTTT RRRRREEEEECCCCCOOOOOMMMMMMMMMMEEEEENNNNNDDDDDAAAAATTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNNSSSSS AAAAARRRRREEEEE TTTTTHHHHHAAAAATTTTT AAAAALLLLLLLLLL PPPPPRRRRREEEEEGGGGGNNNNNAAAAANNNNNTTTTT WWWWWOOOOOMMMMMEEEEENNNNN
MMMMMUUUUUSSSSSTTTTT BBBBBEEEEE SSSSSCCCCCRRRRREEEEEEEEEENNNNNEEEEEDDDDD FFFFFOOOOORRRRR GGGGGEEEEESSSSSTTTTTAAAAATTTTTIIIIIOOOOONNNNNAAAAALLLLL DDDDDIIIIIAAAAABBBBBEEEEETTTTTEEEEESSSSS BBBBBEEEEETTTTTWWWWWEEEEEEEEEENNNNN TTTTTHHHHHEEEEE 2222244444ttttthhhhh
aaaaannnnnddddd 2222288888ttttthhhhh WWWWWEEEEEEEEEEKKKKKSSSSS OOOOOFFFFF PPPPPRRRRREEEEEGGGGGNNNNNAAAAANNNNNCCCCCYYYYY.....
Some important tips:
  If your diabetes is detected during pregnancy report to a
diabetologist or an obstetrician immediately.
  Diet control and exercises are initial steps in the management like
other diabetic patients, but oral hypoglycemic tablets are not
recommended during pregnancy.
  The oral drugs should be immediately stopped as soon as pregnancy
is confirmed and patient should be switched over to insulin.
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 32
temperatures like shelf near the cooking stove in the kitchen or
geyser in the bathroom. Constant sunlight at the windows can cause
problem if the bottle of insulin has been left there. Insulin can be kept
safety for 15 - 30 days at room temperature in relatively cooler place
also.
  If you are a known diabetic and planning to conceive keep your
blood glucose as tightly controlled as possible.
  The diabetic woman in child bearing age group must plan family
with doctor s consultation with excellent blood glucose control
throughout.
Some problems in the foetus and mothers are more common
in diabetic pregnancies but if the sugar control is well, a normal pregnancy
and delivery is possible.
  Diabetes per se does not pose contraindication for child bearing.
  Insulin and only insulin remains as a major treatment till delivery.
The best insulin is human insulin.
  Try to maintain fasting blood glucose levels between 70 to 90 mg/
dl and post prandial 100-135 mg/dl. through out preconception
period and during pregnancy.
  You may have to do some special blood tests and frequent
sonographic examinations during pregnancy for evaluation of
normal foetal growth.
  Diabetic ladies should avoid oral contraceptive tablets and use
other barrier methods for contraception.
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 33
DIABETES AND YOUTH
No age is barred from getting attacked by diabetes, but diabetes
at young age is a special condition. There are many physical, endocrinal
and psychological changes taking place in young diabetic patients. Their
activities and food requirements are higher than adult patients. This type
of diabetes needs only insulin for managemnet. The adolescent changes
in the minds need to be understood by the parents and other family
members. The managemnet becomes easier if the parents and the child
have good rapport. Counseling and psychiatric help is sometimes essential
at this stage for better compliance. Children should be given enough
freedom regarding diet and activities but still be supervised. Occupation,
job, marriage and post-marriage events do not pose any problem in a
well-controlled young diabetic patient. Horizon is as open for these
young people as it is for non-diabetic ones.
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 34
SELF MONITORING
Self-monitoring means that the patient can monitor and maintain
test results of urine and blood sugar examinations at home. It s a novel
concept so that you have maximum information about your health situation.
Urine can be examined for presence of sugars, proteins and ketones. Sugar
in urine does not carry much significance and blood sugar examination is
the only confirmatory test. But it is better than doing nothing. Commercially
available urine strips are quite reliable and give useful information to the
doctor. Ketone body testing is most important in urine test. They are present
in urine when DM control is very poor and body is under severe metabolic
stress. It is an emergency situation.
Home blood glucose monitoring is an important examination
that can be carried out by patient himself. Small pocket size glucometers
are available commercially. They give instant blood glucose results. A
Person can check blood glucose at different times in a day and as and
when required in the case of hypoglycemia. Your visits to pathology
laboratory are reduced. You know your blood glucose levels over a long
period that helps in maintaining normoglycemia. Blood test done in
laboratory by venous route have slightly different values than those
checked by glucometer. HHHHHaaaaavvvvviiiiinnnnnggggg gggggllllluuuuucccccooooommmmmeeeeettttteeeeerrrrr fffffooooorrrrr iiiiinnnnnsssssuuuuullllliiiiinnnnn rrrrreeeeeqqqqquuuuuiiiiirrrrriiiiinnnnnggggg pppppaaaaatttttiiiiieeeeennnnnttttt
iiiiisssss ttttthhhhheeeee tttttoooooppppp ppppprrrrriiiiiooooorrrrriiiiitttttyyyyy iiiiinnnnn ttttthhhhheeeee pppppuuuuurrrrrccccchhhhhaaaaassssseeeee llllliiiiisssssttttt ooooofffff yyyyyooooouuuuurrrrr hhhhhooooouuuuussssseeeeehhhhhooooolllllddddd gggggaaaaadddddgggggeeeeetttttsssss.....
You can make a practice to enter your glucometer readings in
following format of the table. This would definitely help your physician
in assessing your condition.
Date Pre Post Pre Post Pre Post 3 a.m. SOS
breakfast breakfast lunch lunch dinner dinner
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 35
LONG TERM COMPLICATIONS OF
DIABETES AND MANAGEMENT
Diabetic complications are medical problems that occur more
often in people with diabetes than those without diabetes.
UUUUUnnnnncccccooooonnnnntttttrrrrrooooolllllllllleeeeeddddd dddddiiiiiaaaaabbbbbeeeeettttteeeeesssss over a long period of time causes
changes in practically every organ in the body. If proper precaution is
taken at the right time, most of these complications are avoidable or
can at least be postponed. High blood sugar levels for long period cause
changes in the blood vessels and nerves. This leads to involvement of
target organs. The lining of blood vessels gets thicker and the lumen is
reduced. As a result blood flow to the affected organ is reduced.
Thus the heart, brain, kidney etc. can get affected if the related
vessels are involved. Regular follow-up with the doctor, meticulous sugar
control and following the advice does help in the management of these
complications. The major organs affected by diabetes are
  Eyes
  Heart
  Kidney
  Foot
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 36
EEEEEyyyyyeeeeesssss::::: Early Cataractus changes and changes in blood vessels
of eyes are very common. It is a usual cause of blindness
in diabetes and it is avoidable to some extent. Visit the
specialist once a year for eye examination even if you do
not have any eye problem (it your diabetes is more than five years old).
Remember that correction for spectacle number by an optician is not
enough.
HHHHHeeeeeaaaaarrrrrttttt aaaaannnnnddddd bbbbbrrrrraaaaaiiiiinnnnn::::: If the disease is not controlled heart and
brain blood vessels of diabetics are affected at earlier stage
than non-diabetic people. Diabetics may not experience typical
 filmy type chest  pain of heart attack. Most of the times they
may only feel some discomfort. Silent infarct or painless heart
attacks do occur in diabetic patients due to involvement of nerves and
blood vessels.
Unexplained sweating, discomfort in left arm and neck can be
an indication of heart attack. Some important tips are
  Strictly follow the advice of the doctor.
  Do not postpone the specialized tests like the treadmill test,
recommended by the doctor just because you may not suffer at
that moment.
Most of the heart attacks and paralysis can be averted or atleast
postponed if medication is started in time. Be particular about your diet, fat
intake and exercises. These have definitive roles in prevention of heart diseases.
KKKKKiiiiidddddnnnnneeeeeyyyyy::::: Kidney failures and problems are very commonly
seen in uncontrolled diabetes. High blood pressure is a
common occurrence in diabetic patients. Regular
examination of blood pressure and urine should be done
to avoid this complication.
Examination of urinary proteins and microalbumin is essential
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 37
to initiate early treatment and retard kidney damage. Do not wait for
warning symptoms of high blood pressure to occur.
FFFFFOOOOOOOOOOTTTTT
Foot in diabetes is at risk. There are three major
problems.
  Poor blood circulation
  Reduced sensation due to involvement of nerves
  Susceptibility to infections
The pain, which is a protective reflex, may be absent in some
patients due to involvement of nerves. In such cases the injury may go
unnoticed. This can lead to foot ulcer and infections.
Due to poor blood circulation the healing process is very slow.
Each year more than 50,000 people with diabetes lose a limb
or a part of a limb due to diabetic complication. This can be upsetting
news to the patient but most of these problems are because of
unawareness and negligence of both the patient and the doctor.
SSSSSooooommmmmeeeee fffffoooooooooottttt cccccaaaaarrrrreeeee tttttiiiiipppppsssss
  Wear proper sized footware.
  Inspect your feet daily for blister, injury
  Discoloration on foot
  Wash and scrub the foot gently. Moisten
with cream after proper drying.
  In-toe space for infection
  Pressure points due to footwear
  Cracks over heels
  Never walk barefooted indoor or outdoor.
  Wear cotton socks. Cut nails straight across.
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 38
RRRRReeeeemmmmmeeeeemmmmmbbbbbeeeeerrrrr
Footwear shopping should be done preferably late in the
afternoon when foot is slightly bigger in size than in the morning hours.
Inspect your shoes from inside before wearing and remove any foreign
materials like small stones or sand.
Do not buy footwear unless they are 100% comfortable.
Report to the doctor about foot injury if it does not heal in
2-3 days.
NNNNNEEEEERRRRRVVVVVEEEEESSSSS
Long years of uncontrolled diabetes in some
patients can lead to involvement of nerves. Burning in
feet and cramps in legs are very common. They can
have tingling sensation over feet, sole and fingers.
This is described as glove and stocking type of neuropathy.
This is very important as sensations at these points may be
decreased and injury may go unnoticed. These painless injuries may lead
to diabetic foot complications.
SSSSSeeeeexxxxxuuuuuaaaaalllll dddddyyyyysssssfffffuuuuunnnnnccccctttttiiiiiooooonnnnn
Long standing uncontrolled
DM is one of the reasons for impotence.
Complete physical and psychological
evaluation is necessary. Advanced
medical care offers good results in the
management of sexual dysfunction.
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 39
PSYCHOLOGICAL FACTORS AND DIABETES
Diagnosis of diabetes in the very first stage can cause lot of
stress to the patient. Some patients feel victimized. They may have  why
me   feeling. There is no cure to this disease. Person has to live with it.
But most of these above-mentioned negative reactions are due to
misconceptions about diabetes. There is a lot of unawareness about it.
Counseling to the patient at this stage helps to alter his attitude towards
the disease. This in turn results in better acceptance and compliance.
Involvement of family members in diabetes care is very important. Person
may feel deprived of food due to many restrictions on diet. Tailor-made
diet that will take into account person s likes and dislikes can be offered
with the help of a dietician. Sexual dysfunction can be a major factor
of worry. Help of andrologists, gynaecologists and psychologists can
reorient life in a proper direction.
Other psychological stress factors like office work, household
problems, financial difficulties can ultimately lead to a rise in the blood
glucose level. The health care personnel should extend his support to
cope up such situations. Regular aerobics, Yogic exercises and meditation
plays an important role in stress management. Short vacation from
routine life can be of great help as a stress reliever
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 40
CAN DIABETES BE PREVENTED?
It is a million-dollar question. It is theoretically possible but
practically very difficult. This is because it does not have one specific
reason which one can take care of Preventive steps can be taken at
different stages.
PPPPPrrrrriiiiimmmmmaaaaarrrrryyyyy ppppprrrrreeeeevvvvveeeeennnnntttttiiiiiooooonnnnn:::::
This means the prevention of Diabetes Mellitus to occur at first
step. Genetic counseling can help at this step. Marriage between two
diabetic persons is not advisable as stronger family history makes offspring
more prone to get diabetes. Ideally, marriage between two genetic
prediabetic should be avoided. Gene therapy and specific protection
against the disease are the challenges of new millenium. Person having
strong family history of diabetes can definitely take some precautions.
Healthy food habits and a physically active life can keep the disease
away. Risk factors like obesity, smoking and tobacco chewing are definitely
modifiable. What you need is more of self-control and self-confidence.
You should always be telling yourself  It is not difficult, I can do it .
SSSSSeeeeecccccooooonnnnndddddaaaaarrrrryyyyy ppppprrrrreeeeevvvvveeeeennnnntttttiiiiiooooonnnnn:::::
Earliest diagnosis of the disease and proper management is
required to avoid the long-term complications. This can be achieved by
maintaining blood glucose levels as normal as possible. Various tests for
screening of target organs are easily available. Complete medical check
up and tests like microalbumin excretion, treadmill test, and fundoscopy
are helpful in detecting the earliest involvement of organs. Medical
intervention at right time and initiation of medication definitely can
postpone or retard the development of complications.
TTTTTeeeeerrrrrtttttiiiiiaaaaarrrrryyyyy ppppprrrrreeeeevvvvveeeeennnnntttttiiiiiooooonnnnn:::::
At tertiary level of prevention, measures can be taken to retard
the progress of complications, which have already occurred. Target organ
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 41
involvement like heart disease, kidney problem is managed successfully.
Newer techniques in cardiology, advances in the field of dialysis and
renal replacement therapy have brightened the life of diabetics. Modern
medical practice has really offered not only longevity but also better
quality of life to diabetic people.
HEIGHT - WEIGHT TABLE OF AVERAGE VALUES
HHHHHeeeeeiiiiiggggghhhhhttttt (((((MMMMMeeeeettttteeeeerrrrr)))))
WWWWWeeeeeiiiiiggggghhhhhttttt 1.55 1.60 1.65 1.70 1.75 1.80 1.85 1.90 1.95
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 42
EPILOGUE
Now you should be convinced that diabetes is not the dreaded
disease as it was thought to be decades before. Your positive attitude
towards the disease is very important. What we require is little
modification in your life style to make it more organized and disciplined!
Availability of artificial sweeteners allows you to enjoy delicious food
preparations. Newer injection devices and purer forms of insulin have
made life of diabetics more comfortable. Advancement in pancreatic
transplants, gene therapy definitely offers brighter future to the diabetic
population. Better understanding about the disease and its management
will help you to lead healthy, complication free life.
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 43
IDENTITY CARD FOR
A DIABETES PATIENT
This card can give valuable information in case of
emergency.
Identity Card
Name :
Adress: Photo
Tel. No. (R) :
Tel. No. (O) :
Close relative s Phone & Adress :
Current Medicines :
AAAAAppppppppppeeeeeaaaaalllll
I am a diabetic patient. If I am found in
unconscious or semiconscious state please given
me sugar/sweet and please take me to a nearest
doctor.
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes 44
(cid:137)(cid:137)(cid:137) Diabetes