IAP KI BAAT COMMUNITY KE SAATH
IAP ki Baat Core Committee
Dr. G.V. Basavraja: National President 2024
Dr. Vasant Khalatkar: National President 2025
Dr. Yogesh Parikh: Hon. Secretary General 2024-25
Dr. Atanu Bhadra: National Treasurer 2024-25
NATIONAL COORDINATORS
Dr Geeta Patil (Scientific Committee)
Dr Samir Dalwai (Media Committee)
Dr Kishore Baindur (Monitoring Committee)
Dr Shantharaj (Monitoring Committee)
Dr Amaresh K Patil (Liaison Committee)
SCIENTIFIC COMMITTEE MEDIA COMMITTEE
Dr. Piyali Bhattacharya Dr K S Multani
Dr. Prashant Kariya Dr Arundhati Patil
Dr. Gayatri Bezboruah Dr Surendra Singh Bisht
Dr. Cherukuri Nirmala Dr Satish Agarwal
Dr. Manmeet Kaur Sodhi Dr Dibyendu Raychauduri
Dr. Mubashir Hassan Shah Dr Jagruti Sanghvi
Dr Kottooru Srisailam
Dr Pawankalyan
Experts
Convenor
Dr S G Kasi
Members
Dr Sanjay Marathe
Dr Sunil Kumar Agarwalla
Dr Sanjeev Gupta
Dr Muralidhar Reddy
What is Vaccination and Immunization
Vaccination is a process in which killed or modified disease causing germs, are introduced
into the body, commonly by injections, but also by oral route and nasal sprays. The available
vaccines prevent more than 20 diseases helping people of all ages live longer, healthier lives.
Vaccination is a simple, safe and effective way of protecting baby against harmful diseases,
before they come in contact with the germs. It uses the body s natural defences to build
resistance to specific infections and makes immune system much stronger. Vaccines reduces
the risk of complications and mortality following subsequent exposure to an infectious agent.
In this way vaccinated person develops immunity against the specific disease causing germ.
What is the importance of Vaccines
Vaccines have changed our perception about infectious diseases. Infections, which were
considered as a curse for mankind, have reduced considerably, due to the effect of vaccines.
Smallpox has been eradicated, polio is present only in two countries on this planet, measles,
rubella, diphtheria, pertussis has declined considerably. It should be remembered that only a
handful of infections-measles, rubella, polio, can be eliminated from the face of this earth.
The vast majority can only be kept under control and this can be achieved only by the
continued use of vaccines even after the diseases are no longer widely seen in the community.
We now have vaccines to prevent more than 20 life-threatening diseases. Immunization
currently prevents 3.5-5 million deaths every year from diseases like diphtheria, tetanus,
pertussis, influenza and measles.
Immunizations are also one of the best health investments money can buy. Immunization
protects health of individuals, communities and economies from the devastating effects of
Vaccine-Preventable Disease threats. The Covid-19 pandemic was a classic example of the
devastation that an infectious disease can cause and how vaccines can hasten recovery of the
economies from its effects.
Presently, the National Immunization Program (NIP), of the government of India, provides
protection against 12 disease causing germs. In the future, vaccines against HPV and typhoid
are in pipeline.
In India, about 27 million children are born every year. The National Immunization Program
(NIP), which targets every newborn for vaccinations, constitutes the largest immunization
program in the world.
The Indian Academy of Paediatrics (IAP) recommends vaccines against mumps, typhoid,
hepatitis A, chicken pox and influenza. These diseases are not a major public health burden,
but are important for improving the quality of life. Protection against these illnesses reduces
school absenteeism, loss of working days to the parents, prevents rare complications caused by
these disease causing germs and in general improves the quality of life.
The baby has spent 9 months in the mother s womb, protected from all germs and getting the
optimal nutrition. From the moment of birth, the newborn is exposed to a multitude of germs,
some of them are potentially dangerous. The baby may have some protection against some of
the germs, but almost no protection against some of the dangerous germs. Hence, the need for
vaccines to protect the baby.
Vaccines are the most valuable gift that can be given to a child, for a long healthy and
productive life.
The National Immunization Schedule (NIP) by the Govt. of India
The Indian Academy of Pediatrics (IAP) schedule
What do vaccines contain?
1. Antigen: the most active part of the vaccine
2. Adjuvant: chemicals which enhance the immune response of the antigen
3. Preservatives: prevent germs from growing in the vaccine vial e.g., Thiomersal
4. Stabilizers: chemicals which maintain the potency of the vaccine during the
manufacturing process and transport
5. Surfactants: chemicals which prevent the vaccine particles from sticking to each other
6. Residuals: chemicals which are left over after the final purification process, including
antibiotics.
How do Vaccines work?
Vaccines are like superheroes for your child s health. They train the immune system to fight
off the dangerous germs. It will not make your child sick, but will train the immune system
how to recognize and fight off the real germ if exposed to it in the future.
This greatly reduces the risk of becoming seriously ill or spreading a disease to others.
Vaccines can protect against one or multiple diseases. Sometimes, multiple vaccines may be
given at once to protect against several diseases.
Vaccines trick the immune system into believing that the actual disease causing germs have
entered the body. When a vaccine is introduced into the body, the immune system of the body
interacts with the germs present in the vaccine and produces proteins known as antibodies,
which act only against the germs in the vaccine. In addition, certain cells get programmed to
remember this exposure to the germs. When the germ enters the body again, these specialized
cells known as memory cells, get activated and produce very large quantities of antibodies.
These antibodies surround the germs and kill them, thus preventing these germs from causing
disease in the vaccinated person. It should be noted that vaccines protect the vaccinated
individual only against the germ present in the vaccine.
What are the types of vaccines:
Vaccines are made using several processes. They may contain
1. Live viruses or bacteria that have been attenuated (weakened or altered so as not to
cause illness). Protection induced by live vaccines are very long lasting. Chicken pox,
Measles-Mumps-Rubella vaccines are some examples
2. Inactivated or killed organisms or viruses. Organisms are killed by heat or chemicals.
The organism cannot multiply but retains the ability to stimulate the immune system
of the vaccinated person. Inactivated Polio vaccine and Conjugate Typhoid vaccines
are some examples.
3. Inactivated toxins. Some diseases e.g. Tetanus and Diphtheria are caused by
chemicals released by the organism. These chemicals are called toxins. Inactivated
toxins are made into toxoid vaccines. Tetanus Toxoid and Diphtheria toxoids are some
examples.
4. Segments of the pathogen. The vaccine contains specific proteins or sugars found on
the surface of the organism. Hib vaccine and the Pneumococcal conjugate vaccines
are some examples.
5. Genetic material of the organism. mRNA and DNA vaccines have shot into
prominence during the Covid pandemic. Covid vaccines by Pfizer and Moderna are
examples of mRNA vaccines and ZyCoV-D is an example of a DNA vaccine.
How are vaccines developed and tested before being used in the
population?
Each and every vaccine undergoes rigorous testing, in different phases, during its
development phase. The various phases of vaccine development are:
1. Exploratory Phase: in this phase, scientists study to find out which part of the
organism can be used as a vaccine, and whether any modification are necessary to
make that vaccine recognisable by the immune system of humans.
2. Pre-Clinical Phase: In this phase, the vaccine candidate is tested in laboratory animals
to check for safety and the ability of the vaccine to stimulate the immune response.
This phase may last 1-2 years.
3 Phase I: The vaccine is studied in a small group of 20-50 adults.
The goal of Phase I is to check if the vaccine is safe and how well it stimulates the
immune system of the vaccinated individual.
4 Phase 2: The vaccine is tested in a few hundred people. In this phase, the
investigators focus on the vaccine's safety, its ability to produce protective antibodies,
the best dose, timing of doses, interval between doses and the route of administration
of the vaccine.
5 Phase 3: Vaccines which have completed phase 2 trial successfully, enter the phase 3
trial. Phase 3 trials recruit thousands or many thousands of volunteers, from sites
across the world, in different continents and different socio-economic conditions. The
primary objective is to assess safety and identify rare side effects. The ability of the
vaccine to prevent the targeted diseases is assessed. In addition, the antibody levels
elicited by the vaccine is also assessed.
6 Phase 4: phase 4 trials are conducted after the vaccine has been introduced in the
population. This phase, assess how well the vaccine performs in the population and
not in highly controlled situations. It assesses how well the vaccine performs in the
elderly population, and those with medical conditions which may affect the response
to vaccines. It can also unravelled very rare side-effects. This phase can go on for a
few years.
As will be noted, at every stage of vaccine development, safety assessment is of
paramount importance. Any vaccine found to be unsafe will never enter the stage of
usage in humans.
Till recently, the development of a vaccine, from first identifying the causative agent
of a disease to delivering a vaccine for use in the population, could take anywhere
from 10 to 15 years. Present day technology enables development of vaccines at a
much faster pace. The first Covid-19 vaccine was developed in less than a year. Till
recently different phases of vaccine development was done in sequential manner , the
covid pandemic demanded that developmental phases should be accelerated .Thus
arose the new pattern of vaccine development where in the different phases were done
parallelly. The safety assessment of vaccines were not compromised.
Are vaccines safe?
As the child s guardian and caretaker, parents are concerned about the safety of vaccines.
Considering all factors, vaccines are the safest and most cost-effective method of protecting
children from infectious diseases.
Before any vaccine is introduced into the market, it has to undergo rigorous trials and testing,
initially in the laboratory and later, through the three phases of clinical trials on human
beings. At every stage, assessment of safety is of paramount importance.
Any vaccine, which is not proven to be safe, will never be used in humans, especially
very young children. Even after the vaccine is introduced in the population, they are
continuously monitored for any side effects which were not detected in the phase of
clinical trials.
When any unusual side effects are noticed following any use of vaccine ,well
established protocols are in place, by international bodies viz WHO, to establish
whether any reported side effects occurring following the administration of a vaccine
is caused by the vaccine itself or is a coincidental side effect. This is called adverse
events following immunisations(AEFI) surveillance ,reporting and causality
assessment.
Although generally very safe, like any other medicine, vaccines can cause side effects.
However, most of these are very minor and are of very short duration. Examples of this
type of side effects include pain, swelling or mild fever. Severe allergic reactions
following vaccinations are extremely rare and occur in about 1-2 cases per million.
Claims that vaccines cause allergies, autism, brain damage or diabetes have been
carefully researched and disproved.
What are vaccine schedules?
A vaccination schedule is a timetable of the series of vaccination of the same vaccine or
multiple vaccines. A vaccination schedule mentions the name of the vaccine, age group
eligible for vaccination and the interval between doses of the same vaccine. It also mentions
the interval between different vaccines.
Many vaccines require multiple doses for maximum effectiveness, either to produce
sufficient initial immune response or to boost response that fades over time.
Vaccine schedules are developed by governmental agencies or medical organizations, to
achieve maximum effectiveness using required and recommended vaccines, while
minimizing the number of visits to the health care system.
In India, two schedules are followed: the National Immunization Program (NIP) schedule and
the Indian Academy of Pediatrics (IAP) schedule. The government immunisation programme
(NIP) caters to the population at large and provides vaccines free of charge, as recommended
by the National Technical Advisory Group on Immunizations.(NTAGI). It targets diseases
which cause high mortality and morbidity in the community and thus have a significant
public health importance. On the other hand, private providers follow the IAP schedule,
which includes vaccines which are important for the individual child but not of public health
importance. These vaccines prevent loss of school days, prevent loss of work days by the
caregivers and improve the quality of life. NIP provides fewer vaccines than the IAP
schedule. Moreover, the schedules of the NIP and IAP differ to some extent.
While schedules are to be followed, a delay in the schedule does not warrant starting all over
again. The schedule can be completed with the remaining doses at the recommended
intervals.
Is it safe to give my child extra doses of vaccines given in campaigns?
Generally, extra doses of most vaccines are safe. These campaigns are conducted to raise the
population immunity against the targeted germs and to halt the transmission of the germs in
the community. This will hasten eradication of the germ. These programs are not primarily
intended for individual protection. It is your duty to vaccinate your child during these
campaigns. Examples of campaign mode vaccines include the oral polio vaccine (OPV-Pulse
polio campaign)and the Measles, Rubella (MR)campaign. Child should receive the vaccines
administered in campaign mode even if they have received these vaccines as part of their
routine immunisation. It is necessary and safe.
Vaccines are not for children only   Adolescents and Adults too need them.
  Adults are 100 times more likely than children to die of diseases that can be prevented
by vaccines
  Childhood administered vaccine induced immunity can begin to fade over time. So,
adults and adolescents may need periodic boosters of some vaccines e.g. Td
  Some adults were never vaccinated as children
  Newer vaccines were not available when some adolescents and adults were children.
Such adolescents and adults should receive these newer vaccines
  As we age, we become more susceptible to serious disease caused by common germs
(e.g., Flu, Pneumococcus). Effective and safe vaccines are available against these
germs
FAQs
1. Do infants have natural immunity? If yes, why do they need vaccines?
Babies may get some temporary protection from antibodies transferred, during
pregnancy, from the mother s blood to the newborn. This is only for diseases to which
mother is immune. Breastfeeding may also protect the baby temporarily from minor
infections. These antibodies do not last long, leaving the baby vulnerable to disease.
2. Is natural immunity better than vaccine-acquired immunity?
In some cases, natural immunity is longer-lasting than the immunity gained from
vaccination. But natural infection carries the risk of complications which are very rare
following vaccinations. Natural Measles infection can cause brain involvement in 1 in
1000 individuals. This risk is practically not there with measles vaccine. Severe
allergic reactions to MMR vaccine occurs at the rate of 1 in 1 million vaccinated
individuals.
3. Why should my baby receive vaccines so early in life? Can I postpone it by a few
months?
In developing countries like India, infection occur very early in life. Hence, it is
essential to begin the process of vaccinations when the baby is just a few weeks of
age. The baby does not have natural immunity to most of these infections. These
infections can be devastating to the baby.
4. Why should my child receive so many vaccines?
The young infant is susceptible to many germs, in whom the complications of the
infections are much higher than in older children. Hence, the need for protection
against multiple germs simultaneously.
5. Why should my child receive so many doses of the same vaccine?
The young infant s immune system is not completely mature. The immune response
to each dose, is less than that as would occur in older children. Hence the need for
multiple doses to get a protective immune response. For some infections, e.g.
Diphtheria ,Tetanus, the protection wanes over a period of time. Hence, repeat dose
called booster are to be administered periodically.
6. We give so many vaccines, in such a short period of time, to such a young baby!
Will the baby s immune system be overloaded?
The human body has a fantastic capability to respond to innumerable antigens at the
same time. Hence, multiple vaccines cannot overload the baby s immune system or
make the baby s immune system weak.
7. I have heard that many vaccines contain mercury which can damage the brain. Is
it true?
The type of mercury used in vaccines is called Thiomersal. Mercury in very low doses
can prevent the growth of germs in the vaccine vial. This is particularly important
when multi dose vaccine vials are being used. Large studies, done by very important
and prestigious medical organisations, have very clearly demonstrated that there is no
link between the use of mercury in vaccines and brain damage or autism. Mercury in
vaccines is safe.
8. What about Aluminium in vaccine? Is it safe?
Aluminium is a substance added to vaccines to enhance the immune response by the
vaccine. Aluminium is very commonly found in nature and is present in air, food, and
water. Previous scientific research has shown the amount of aluminium exposure in
people who follow the recommended vaccine schedule is low and is not readily
absorbed by the body and found to be safe.
9. My brother s child developed features of autism in the second year of life, after the
administration of the MMR vaccine. He firmly believes that MMR caused autism
and has advised me not to administer the vaccine to my toddler. What are the
facts about the link between MMR and autism?
A scientific paper was published in 1999 by a British physician who claimed to have
evidence that the MMR (measles, mumps and rubella) vaccine was linked to autism.
The potential link has been thoroughly explored; study after study has found no such
link, and The Lancet, which had originally published it, has formally retracted the
original 1998 study, as there were serious methodological flaws and conflicts of
interest. It is likely that this misconception persists because of the coincidence of
timing between early childhood vaccinations and the first appearance of symptoms of
autism. MMR does not cause Autism.
10. Why do some children develop the disease in spite of taking the vaccines?
All vaccines are not 100% effective. Vaccines work by eliciting an immune response
in the body of the vaccinated person. This capacity to mount an immune response
may not be sufficient in a few individuals in the population. The vaccines may not
protect them. On the other hand, most vaccines protect over 95% of the vaccinated
individuals. Non-responsiveness to a vaccine is more an exception rather than a rule.
11. Can you get a disease from the vaccine that s supposed to prevent it?
Live, attenuated (or weakened) vaccines are theoretically capable of causing illness:
because they can still replicate (though not well), mutation is possible, which can lead
to a virulent form of the pathogen. This has been reported with the oral polio vaccine.
However, it is very rare.
12. Do I need to be vaccinated against diseases that I do not see in my community or
my country?
Although vaccine-preventable diseases have become uncommon in many countries,
the infectious agents that cause them continue to circulate in some parts of the world.
In a highly inter-connected world, they can cross geographical borders and infect
anyone who is not protected.
13. What if my baby has a cold or fever, or is taking antibiotics? Can they still get
vaccinated?
Yes. Your child can still get vaccinated if they have a mild illness, a low-grade fever,
or when taking antibiotics. Your doctor is the most appropriate person to take this
decision.
14. Why should I vaccinate my child against a mild illness like chickenpox?
Even uncomplicated cases of chickenpox cause children to miss a week or more of
school, with a caregiver missing work to care for the sick child. The disease can
spread to other children. If a child with a weak immunity gets chickenpox, it can lead
to serious complications.
15. What are the risks and benefits of vaccines?
Getting naturally exposed to diseases like pertussis, diphtheria and measles can result
in significant complications to your child. On the other hand, vaccines may cause
minor side-effects like fever, pain, swelling and poor feeding. Serious reactions to
vaccines are extremely rare. Thus, the disease-prevention benefits of vaccination are
much greater than the possible side effects for almost all children.
16. What are the common side effects observed after vaccination?
Vaccines, like any medication, may cause some side effects. Most of these side effects
are very minor, like soreness or some swelling where the shot was given, fussiness, or
a low-grade fever. These side effects typically only last a couple of days and are
treatable.
17. Can serious or severe side effects occur following vaccinations?
Serious allergic reactions to vaccines are extremely rare. The rates are 1 to 2 per
million doses of the vaccines. Every doctor who administers vaccines, has facilities
and the expertise to deal with these emergencies at the site of vaccination.
18. Why do the private providers (Indian Academy of Paediatrics schedule) offer
some vaccines that are not available in Government s programme?
The government immunisation programme (NIP) caters to the population at large and
provides vaccines recommended by the National Technical Advisory Group on
Immunisations(NTAGN). It targets diseases which cause high mortality and
morbidity in the community and thus have a significant public health importance. On
the other hand, private providers follow the IAP schedule, which includes vaccines
which are not public health issues, but which are important at the individual level.
These vaccines prevent loss of school days, prevent loss of work days by the
caregivers and improve the quality of life. NIP provides fewer vaccines than the IAP
schedule. Moreover, the schedules of the NIP and IAP differ to some extent.
19. If all the children in my surrounding are vaccinated, should my child still receive
vaccines? Will my child not be protected by  Herd Immunity ?
A population with a high number of members with immunity to a particular disease or
pathogen may give protection from that infection to the small number who have not
been vaccinated. This is known as  herd immunity  or  community immunity  or
 population immunity . However, it is not safe to depend on herd immunity for
individual protection. Herd immunity is applicable only for diseases where there is a
person-to-person transmission and the germ does not exist in any host apart from
humans.
20. My child missed the 3rd dose of the Hexavalent vaccine given at 14 weeks. He is
now 5 months of age. Should the doses be started all over again?
No. Delayed doses does not warrant restarting the entire series. Your child can receive
the 3rd dose now and complete the schedule. However, you should be timely in the
vaccinations and avoid such situations.
21. The government conducts nationwide programs e.g Pulse Polio and MR
campaigns. My child has received all his regular vaccines. Should he still receive
these additional doses?
Yes. These campaigns are conducted to raise the population immunity against the
targeted germs and to halt the transmission of the germs in the community. This will
hasten eradication of the germ. These programs are not primarily intended for
individual protection. It is your duty to vaccinate your child during these campaigns.
Additional doses of vaccines are safe.
Tag lines
1. Healthy Beginnings, Bright Futures: Routine Immunization is the way forward
2. Ensuring a Healthy Start: Routine Immunization for every child
3. Immunization for everyone : From New born to Old age
4. Make your child a VIP (Vaccinated, Immunized and Protected)
5. Immunizations: The best investment for a child's health My choices
Press note
  Vaccines currently protect against 20 infections and Immunization currently prevents
3.5-5 million deaths every year. Smallpox has been eradicated, polio is present only in
two countries on this planet, measles, rubella, diphtheria, pertussis (whooping cough)
has declined considerably.
  According to NFHS-5, 2019-21, the country s full immunization coverage stands
at 76.1%, which means that one out of every four children is missing out on essential
vaccines. According to the latest UNICEF report, in 2022, 93% of surviving infants
received the third dose of DTP-containing vaccine and 90% received the second dose
of a measles-containing vaccine.
  The eradication of polio In India is one of the greatest public health success stories,
not only for India, but for the entire world. Against all odds, delivering the vaccines to
inaccessible areas, vaccinating all the difficult to reach populations, India achieved
this commendable goal. Not only that, India continues to have a very high quality
surveillance system in place, to detect any polio virus in environment and India has
succeeded in keeping even the environment free of any polio viruses.
  The role of the IAP is most important in the immunization program of the country.
  The recommendations of the Indian Academy of Paediatrics (IAP) is followed by
45,000 Paediatrician- members of the IAP.
  In addition to those recommended by the Government, the IAP also recommends
vaccines, which are not against essentially life-threatening illnesses or which do not
constitute a significant public health burden. But these vaccines do prevent illnesses
which negatively affect the quality of life. They prevent loss of school days and loss
of work days by the parents. In addition, it prevents complications arising from these
illnesses.
  Challenges seen/faced/anticipated?
While significant progress has been seen in the field of immunization coverage,
several challenges have impeded the desired progress. Inequitable distribution of
vaccines and inability to reach the magic figure of 90% coverage, gaps in available
human resources, issues related to financing of vaccinations and the necessary
infrastructure, uneven access to vaccines at affordable prices, gaps in coverage and
disease surveillance, wavering community demand for vaccination (Covid vaccines),
outbreaks, conflicts, and humanitarian emergencies, have all contributed to the
progress.
The future lies in the Immunization Agenda 2030 (IA 2030), which envisions  a world
where everyone, everywhere, at every age, fully benefits from vaccines to improve
health and well-being. 
  Recommendations of IAP for
o Government: The Govt. of India should expedite the introduction of HPV
vaccine and the Typhoid conjugate vaccine. Both diseases constitute a
significant public health burden. Safe, effective and low-cost,  Made in India 
vaccines are available.
o Parents: Every child should be immunized with the NIP vaccines. The
additional vaccine recommended by IAP is aimed to improve the quality of
life. The additional vaccines are safe and effective. All schedules should be
completed within the recommended time frame.
o Vaccine makers: The need of the hour is research and development of vaccines
against the vector borne diseases (Dengue, Nipah virus, Chickungunya) and other
diseases which constitute a significant public health burden.
o Other Stakeholders: Continued support for the development, licensure and
roll-out of all new vaccines to be introduced.  
IAP CURRENT ACTIONS/PROGRAM/MISSION MODE: The IAP is committed to
work in tandem with the Govt. of India in all vaccine related issues. Support and
involvement, with the Govt. of India, in the endeavour, to improve the immunization rates in
the community, is a mission for IAP.
"With the exception of safe water, no other public health intervention, not even
antibiotics, has had such a major effect on mortality reduction as have resulted from the
extensive use of vaccines."
Routine Immunization
is birth right of the child
Experts
Dr S G Kasi(Convenor)
Members
Dr Sanjay Marathe
Dr Sunil Kumar Agarwalla
Dr Sanjeev Gupta
Dr Muralidhar Reddy
The little one enters this world.
The baby has spent 9 months in the
It is our duty to provide the best
mother s womb, protected from all
possible protection to enable optimum
germs and getting the optimal nutrition.
growth and development.
Circle of
protection
From the moment of birth, your child is
exposed to thousands of germs every
day in his environment through the food
he eats, the air he breathes and
things he puts in his mouth.
This circle of Protection can be
provided
by various strategies
What are vaccines?
Vaccines are injections
(shots), liquids, or nasal sprays
that is given to the baby, to
teach the baby s immune
system to recognize and
defend itself against harmful
germs.
Types of Vaccines  ..
Vaccines also contain  
The human immune system
consists of  .
Vaccines erect an almost
impenetrable wall of protection
between your child and
childhood infections
The National Immunization
Schedule (NIP) by the Govt. of India
The Indian Academy of Pediatrics
(IAP) schedule
Why should my child receive
vaccines when the infections are
no longer seen?
Are Vaccines safe??
Studies in animals
Why so many vaccines ? and
so early in life?
  Immunity transferred from mother and from breast milk does not
last for more than a few months.
  The baby is susceptible to many dangerous infections
  In a country like India, these disease occur very early in life as
compared to High-Income western countries
  So, the baby needs many vaccines in the first year of life.
Why so many doses of
the same vaccine?
Globally, How well
have vaccines worked?
How well have vaccines worked in
India?
Disease Before vaccine After vaccine % change
Smallpox 1970: 23546 1976: 0 100
Polio 1980: 18975 Since 2012: 0 100
Tetanus: Neonatal 1988: 11,849 2021: 81 95
Tetanus: Total 1980: 45948 2021: 1240 95
Diphtheria 1980: 39231 2018: 8788 78
Pertussis 1980: 320,109 2018: 13208 95
Measles 1980: 114,306 2023: 13220 89
Vaccines cause Allergies, Autism
and more  .. ????
DEBUNKED
Vaccines do so many GOOD things
to your baby  .
And Remember
Vaccines are not just for babies!!
Vaccines are for everyone