2ND EDITION OF WORLD CONGRESS ON
INFECTIOUS
DISEASES
JUNE 2022
VIRTUAL EVENT
Contact us:
Ph: +1 (702) 988-2320
WhatsApp: +1 (540) 709 1879
Email: infectious@magnusconference.com
Website: https://infectiouscongress.com/
2ND EDITION OF WORLD CONGRESS ON
INFECTIOUS
DISEASES
17-18 ENUJ
BOOK OF
ABSTRACTS
Infection 2022

INDEX
Contents
About Host 4
About Infection 2022 5
Keynote Presentations - Day 1 6
Oral Presentations - Day 1 10
Poster Presentations - Day 1 24
Keynote Presentations - Day 2 32
Oral Presentations - Day 2 35
Participants List 51
Infection 2022

ABOUT MAGNUS GROUP
Magnus Group (MG) is initiated to meet a need and to pursue collective goals of the scientific
community specifically focusing in the field of Sciences, Engineering and technology to endorse
exchanging of the ideas & knowledge which facilitate the collaboration between the scientists,
academicians and researchers of same field or interdisciplinary research. Magnus group is
proficient in organizing conferences, meetings, seminars and workshops with the ingenious
and peerless speakers throughout the world providing you and your organization with broad
range of networking opportunities to globalize your research and create your own identity. Our
conference and workshops can be well titled as  ocean of knowledge  where you can sail your
boat and pick the pearls, leading the way for innovative research and strategies empowering
the strength by overwhelming the complications associated with in the respective fields.
Participation from 90 different countries and 1090 different Universities have contributed
to the success of our conferences. Our first International Conference was organized on
Oncology and Radiology (ICOR) in Dubai, UAE. Our conferences usually run for 2-3
days completely covering Keynote & Oral sessions along with workshops and
poster presentations. Our organization runs promptly with dedicated and
proficient employees  managing different conferences throughout the
world, without compromising service and quality.
Infection 2022

ABOUT INFECTION 2022
Magnus Group takes the pleasure to announce  2nd Edition of World Congress on Infectious
Diseases  - Virtual Event during June 17-18, 2022 with the theme  Stepping Stones in
Infectious Diseases Prevention, Control and Cure . Infectious Disease conference will provide
all the attendees, the opportunity to network with experts, present their research findings to
an international audience and notify the latest scientific developments from world s eminent
speakers and contribute to various discussions that will shape future health policies and a
proper patient care all around the world. The Conference will have a mix of lectures of keynote
addresses, panel discussions, case discussions, current reports of scientific progress featured
in oral abstracts and posters. The chosen topics will be of great benefit to practicing clinicians
and academicians in the field of infectious diseases, medicine, microbiology, epidemiology
and public health. This conference offers an opportunity for faculty, postgraduates, fellows,
residents, and undergraduates to present their work, learn and network with the experts.
Infection 2022

2ND EDITION OF WORLD CONGRESS ON
INFECTIOUS
DISEASES
17-18 ENUJ
KEYNOTE FORUM
DAY 01
Infection 2022

noitcefnI

Ulrich Steinhoff* and Rouzbeh Mahdavi
Department of Medical Microbiology and Hospital Hygiene, Philipps
University of Marburg, Germany
Improved diagnosis and treatment of visceral leishmaniasis
Leishmania donovani L. donovani L. infantum
isceral Leishmaniasis (VL) is the second-largest parasitic killer in the world (after Malaria) caused by parasites of
the complex, including (East-Africa and India) and (Europe, North
Africa and India). VL, also known as kala-azar, is mostly fatal if left untreated and the disease is characterized by
Virregular fever, weight loss, enlargement of the spleen. Therefore, reliable diagnosis and subsequent treatment is vital
for VL-patients. Kinesins are the dominant antigens in visceral leishmaniasis (VL), targeted by the patient s immune
response. However, their sequence and structure (number of repeats) vary between different Leishmania isolates.
L. infantum L. donovani
This explains why rapid diagnosis of VL is still unreliable as commercially available tests are mainly based on rK39
( , Brazil) and rK16 ( , India). Our goal was to develop an improved, rapid diagnostic test-system
suitable for all VL-endemic countries, including Africa, Brazil and India. Further, as VL infected dogs (CVL) are an
important reservoir that enhance the spread of VL, we also tested our new candidate antigens for their potential to
diagnose and differentiate between VL-infected and VL-vaccinated dogs. To select the kinesin antigen(s) for most
specific and efficient VL diagnosis, we sequenced, cloned and expressed the kinesin of VL isolates from East-Africa,
Brazil and India and determined the impact of isolate- and repeat-specific variations on their diagnostic capacity.
Furthermore, we studied in-silico and in vitro the influence of the number of kinesin repeats on antigenicity and
diagnostic performance and could show that the number of Kinesin-repeats has a bigger influence on diagnostic
sensitivity and specificity than strain-specific sequence variations. The second part of our work is concerned with
the treatment of VL-patients. Currently, VL treatment strategies differ in the endemic countries - but common to all
Trypanosoma brucei Trypanosoma
therapeutic approaches are strong side effects and the occurrence of drug resistant Leishmania-species. Currently,
cruzei
it was shown that the group of Kinetoplastida parasites (Leishmania spp., and
) express proteasomes that differ from the host organisms with respect to the proteasomal beta 4 and 5 subunit.
Accordingly, a new class of proteasome inhibitors (azabenzoxazole) was developed that selectively binds to the beta
4/5 subunit of Kinetoplastida, suggesting the proteasome as ideal drug target molecule for infections caused by
the Kinetoplastida parasites. Currently we are testing the suitability of such an inhibitor in the various Leishmania
parasites by analyzing the efficiency of proteasome inhibition -, the parasite viability and survival in host cells. Our
cAuurdreiennt cdea tTaa skheo Aww tahya:t this new class of inhibitors is a very promising drug candidate for the treatment of VL.
  Understanding the biology a complex disease with respect to diagnosis and treatment.
  Improved design of diagnostic antigens, design and testing new therapeutic drugs.
Biography
Dr. Ulrich Steinhoff earned a Diploma and PhD from Max-Planck Institute for Immunobiology, PHD Student from University of Ulm,
Postdoctoral Fellow from University of Z rich, He obtained the position of Group leader and assistant director Max-Planck Institute
for Infection Biology, and professor for Philipps University of Marburg   GERMANY, he has published a several research articles.

noitcefnI

Stephen Hsu*1,2, Douglas Dickinson1, Bianca
Marsh2, Melissa Del Tufo1, Lester Sampath3, Emma
Liu2, Xiaocui Jiang4, Bo Yao4, Lee H Lee5, Tin-chun
Chu6, Jiarong Zhong7

Camellix Research laboratory, USA

Dental College of Georgia, Augusta University, USA

Inopak, Ltd. Ringwood, USA

Hangzhou Sanju Biotechnology Co. LTD, China

Montclair State University, Upper Montclair, USA

Seton Hall University, South Orange, USA

Georgia State University, USA
Novel formulations containing EC16 for future antiviral and
virucidal products
Background:
Norovirus is the world-leading cause of acute gastroenteritis associated with severe symptoms and
deaths. However, vaccines against norovirus are currently not available, and medications that specifically target human
norovirus infection are still under development. Surface disinfectants with activity against norovirus often contain
toxic chemicals such as chlorine-based compounds (e.g., hypochlorite/bleach, ammonium chloride), acids, hydrogen
peroxide, or a combination of these chemicals. However, these chemicals are not suitable for hand hygiene products
to help prevent norovirus outbreaks or certain healthcare associated infections. The current studies evaluated the
virucidal and antiviral activities of epigallocatechingallate-palmitate (EC16), a compound derived from green tea
pMoelythpohden: ols, against murine norovirus (MNV S99, a surrogate for human norovirus) and other microorganisms.
Initially, formulation suitability tests were conducted to compare EGCG (epigallocatechingallate), EC16
and tea polyphenol-palmitate in alcohol solution and hand hygiene formulations. The virucidal activity of EC16 was
then tested in hand sanitizer gel and hand sanitizer foam formulations using a TCID50 time-kill suspension assay. The
hand sanitizer gel prototype was also tested according to the EN13727:2012 (S. aureus and P. aeruginosa), EN13624
(Candida albicans), and EN 14476:2019 (norovirus) protocols. The surface disinfectant spray prototype was tested
against S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, and S. enterica according to the AOAC Official Method 961.02, and against feline
calicivirus according to ASTM test method E1053-20. The prototypes were also tested against spores of Bacillus
cereus and Clostridium sporogenes using time-kill suspension tests. The In vitro treatment and prevention tests were
performed using a 1-hour incubation of EC16 or EGCG with RAW264.7 cells, either pre-infection or post-infection
wReitshu MltsN: V.
Unlike EC16, both EGCG and tea polyphenol-palmitate showed auto-oxidation (color change) and precipitation
in alcohol solution and hand hygiene formulations, and were thus less suitable for potential hand hygiene products
or new drug development. The time-kill suspension test results demonstrated that EC16 in both sanitizer gel and
foam formulations reduced MNV by >99.99% (>log10 4) after 60 sec direct contact. The hand sanitizer gel showed
activities against S. aureus, P. aeruginosa, C. albicans, and murine norovirus with a >log10 7.4 reduction for bacteria,
>log10 6.4 for the yeast, and >log10 5.5 for murine norovirus. The surface disinfectant spray tests passed EPA required
standards with all species tested. The sporicidal activities of similar formulations showed >log10 5 reductions against
two bacterial spores. Without alcohol, one-hour incubation of EC16 with RAW264.7 cells either before or after MNV
iCnofencctliuosni o(in.e:. , without direct contact with MNV) resulted in >99% (>log10 2) reduction of MNV infectivity.
EC16 is a candidate for use as a virucidal and antiviral compound to prevent and treat norovirus infection,

with potential to be developed as a new drug against norovirus, pending in vivo and clinical tests. The hand sanitizer

noitcefnI

and surface disinfectant formulations containing EC16 have the potential to be further developed into novel hand
hygiene and surface disinfectant products with bactericidal, fungicidal, virucidal, and sporicidal activities, pending
aAduddiiteionncael Tstaukdei eAsw aanyd: tests.
  Recognize certain major alcohol-resistant pathogenic microorganisms that pose serious threats to public health,
and the gaps in methods for prevention and control of these microorganisms.
  Know how natural and non-toxic compounds could be used in antiviral and virucidal formulations and medications.
  Understand the advantages and disadvantages of the currently used hand hygiene antiseptics and surface
disinfectants, and the applicable test standards of regulatory agencies.
  Gain knowledge of new technologies and novel prototypes designed to provide better control and prevention of
alcohol-resistant microorganisms with higher efficacy and minimum toxicity.
Biography
Dr. Stephen Hsu earned a bachelor s degree from Wuhan University, China, a Master of Arts degree from Montclair State University
and a PhD. degree from the University of Cincinnati College of Medicine. He spent four years at Memorial Sloan-Kettering Cancer
Center before a career change. During the four years as a sports anchor for ESPN International, Dr. Hsu taught at the National
University of Singapore. Dr. Hsu joined Augusta University in 1999 and serves as Course Director for Nutrition and for Biochemistry.
His research has been supported by the NIH and other agencies, with more than 80 research articles published.

2ND EDITION OF WORLD CONGRESS ON
INFECTIOUS
DISEASES
17-18 ENUJ
SPEAKERS
DAY 01
Infection 2022

noitcefnI

Kai-Fu Tang
Chongqing Medical University, China
Role of dicer in the pathogenesis of HBV-associated hepatocellular carcinoma
icer, a key component of the RNA interference pathway, is also essential for DNA repair. Reactive oxygen species
in inflamed liver tissues induce DNA damage and decrease Dicer expression. The downregulation of Dicer, in turn,
reduces DNA repair efficiency and leads to increased DNA damage. DNA damage leads to an aggravation of inflammation
Dvia various mechanisms. First, it induces the expression of the natural killer group 2D (NKG2D) receptor ligands, and the
binding of these ligands to their receptor promotes inflammation. Second, DNA damage promotes the release of nuclear
DNA into the cytoplasm. Consequently, the cytosolic DNA sensing machinery induces the secretion of proinflammatory
cytokines. Thus, decreased Dicer expression plays a central role in the development of unresolved chronic inflammation,
a common and important factor in neoplasia pathogenesis.
In addition to promoting inflammation, decreased Dicer expression may promote the development of hepatocellular
carcinoma via the following mechanisms. First, decreased Dicer expression reduces DNA repair efficiency, promoting
gene mutation and eventually carcinogenesis. Second, Dicer processes 7SL RNA into small fragments that function as
dominant negative regulators of the full-length 7SL RNA and interfere with signal recognition particle (SRP) complex
formation. Accordingly, a decrease in Dicer expression promotes SRP complex formation via a downregulation of the
7SL RNA fragment biogenesis, which then enhances SRP-mediated protein targeting and increases the translocation
and expression of membrane and secretory proteins, which are upregulated in tumor tissues. Finally, decreased Dicer
expression may promote carcinogenesis by deregulating miRNA expression.
Biography
Dr. Kai-Fu Tang graduated from Chongqing Medical University, Peking Union Medical College, and Chongqing University with a
Bachelor s degree in Medicine, a Master of science degree, and a Doctoral degree in Engineering, respectively. He has successively
worked in Huaying People s Hospital (Sichuan, China), University of Cologne (Cologne, Germany), Friedrich Miescher Institute (Basel,
Switzerland), Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University (Chongqing, China), Wenzhou Medical University (Wenzhou,
China), The First Affiliated Hospital of Medical University (Wenzhou, China), and Chongqing Medical University (Chongqing, China).
Currently, Dr. Tang is a professor at the Key Laboratory of Molecular Biology on Infectious Diseases, Ministry of Education, Chongqing
Medical University. Dr. Tang s research is focused on the role of Dicer in inflammation and inflammation-driven carcinogenesis. He
has published more than 30 papers in international journals such as Genome Biol, J Cell Biol, Nucleic Acids Res, Oncogene, Cell Rep,
Theranostics, Pharmacol Res, Cell Death Dis, Carcinogenesis, and J Biol Chem.

noitcefnI

Wei Jiang*, Ling Luo, Yunzhi Zhang, Xin Zhang, Xiaohao
Wang, Jing Li
Second Affiliated Hospital of Chongqing Medical University, China
Effects of motivational interviewing based on the thrive model of psychological
recovery on post-traumatic growth in patients with post-hepatitis B liver cancer
: A randomized controlled study
n China, about more than 80% of primary liver cancer patients are co-infected with hepatitis B virus. These patients
suffer from great physical and psychological pain during anti-cancer and anti-viral treatment, but there is also a
degree of post-traumatic growth, and post-traumatic growth (PTG) plays an active role in promoting their physical and
Ipsychological recovery and improving their quality of life. This study investigated the effects of motivational interviewing
based on the THRIVE model of psychological recovery on post-traumatic growth, anxiety and depression, and quality
of life in patients with post-hepatitis B liver cancer. We used a single-blind, randomized, controlled trial. A convenience
sample of 100 patients with post-hepatitis B liver cancer who met the inclusion criteria in a tertiary hospital in Chongq
China, was selected for the study, and they were randomly divided into a control group given conventional psychological
care (n=50) and an intervention group given motivational interviewing based on conventional psychological care plus the
THRIVE model of psychological recovery (n=50). The post-traumatic growth, anxiety and depression, and quality of life
of the patients were assessed using the Simplified Chinese version of the Post-Traumatic Growth Inventory (C-PTGI), the
Self-Assessment Scale for Anxiety (SAS), the Self-Assessment Scale for Depression (SDS), and the Quality of Life Scale for
Patients with Liver Cancer (QOL-LC V2.0) before the intervention and 1 and 3 months after discharge, respectively.
The results revealed that at 1 month after discharge and 3 months after discharge, the C-PTGI and the scores of each
dimension in the intervention group were higher than those in the control group, and the SAS and SDS scores were lower
than those in the control group (P 0.01); the QOL-LC total score, psychological function, symptom side effects, and
social function scores in the intervention group were higher than those in the control group (P 0.01), but the difference
between the somatic function scores of the two groups was not statistically However, the difference in somatic function
scores between the two groups was not statistically significant (P 0.05). These results suggest that this study provides
preliminary evidence that motivational interviewing based on the THRIVE model of psychological recovery can enhance
post-traumatic growth, alleviate anxiety and depression, and improve the quality of life of post-hepatitis B liver cancer
pAautdieienntsc teo T saokmee A ewxtaeyn:t.

This study can expand the scope of research on post-traumatic growth, enrich the theoretical and practical studies
related to PTG, and provide methodological references for the study of post-traumatic growth in patients with other

cancers or infectious diseases.
Optimize clinical nurses  psychological care measures for post-hepatitis B liver cancer patients to improve their mental
health and quality of life; the formed PTG intervention model can provide practical references for other infectious

disease patients.
In clinical teaching and research, the research content of this study can provide ideas for mental health education for

patients with infectious diseases. the THRIVE.
Model clearly clarifies the six steps of psychological recovery, namely self-assessment, nurturing hope, telling new
stories, discovering changes, assessing changes, and demonstrating growth with practical actions; and it is used as
a theoretical basis to form an MI applicable to PTG in patients with post-hepatocellular carcinoma after hepatitis B

intervention program, which is highly innovative.
Unlike previous patients who passively and ineffectively received psychological.

noitcefnI


Care interventions, the MI intervention program we designed based on the THRIVE model of psychological recovery
can well establish a good nurse-patient partnership with patients, and the patient s subjective initiative is greatly
improved in solving the problems of patients  psychosocial and behavioral styles, and the efficiency of nurse-patient

communication is also improved to some extent.
This study can provide a new research protocol to address the health promotion of post-hepatitis B liver cancer
patients. Through the MI intervention based on the THRIVE model of psychological recovery for post-hepatitis B liver
cancer patients, we aim to improve PTG levels, improve patients  psychological status and quality of life, and provide
a basis for clinical nurses to implement individualized psychological care for post-hepatitis B liver cancer patients.
Biography
Jiang Wei, a master s degree student in nursing studying at Chongqing Medical University, joined Prof. Luo Ling s research team at
the Second Hospital of Chongqing Medical University in 2019, with research interests in infectious disease nursing and psychological
nursing, and will graduate and obtain her master s degree in 2022. In the Department of Infectious Diseases of the Second Hospital of
Chongqing Medical University, Prof. Luo Ling has guided her in nursing research and has successfully published one paper and another
papers in core journals are under review.

noitcefnI

Pooyan Afzali Harsini*1, Gholamreza Imani2, Saeed
hamzehie3

BS. s of Public Health, Kermanshah University of Medical Sciences, Iran

MD, Department of Medicine, Kermanshah University of Medical
Sciences, Kermanshah

MD, Internal Medicine Specialist, Kermanshah University of Medical
Sciences, Kermanshah
COVID 19 and pregnancy vaccination : Challenges and concerns
he 2019-nCoV (or COVID-19) outbreak began in Wuhan and has since spread throughout China and the world. A
increase in new diseases and deaths poses severe public health and governance concerns in Wuhan. Governments
have taken required activities such as limiting cross-city travel, case detection and contact tracing, quarantine, public
Teducation, and creation of detection kits with the help of the federal government. The society s unity has considerably
decreased challenges including shortage of efficient medications, healthcare services, medical supplies, and logistics. The
epidemic will be ended with the ongoing efforts of national and international multi-sectoral bodies. 48.5 % of the world s
population has had a COVID-19 vaccine. Globally, 6.84 billion doses have been given, with 25.52 million given daily. Only
3% of low-income persons have received one dosage.
Simultaneously, many COVID-19 vaccines have been created and approved at a breakneck pace, all while adhering to
stringent regulatory requirements. Pregnant women had a greater risk of severe illness, ICU admission, and invasive
ventilation compared to non-pregnant patients of the same age. As a result, pregnant women are designated a high-risk
population for COVID-19 infection. A passive approach to pregnant, puerperal, and breastfeeding women s requests for
vaccination does not justify the absence of evidence on the efficacy and evaluation of immunological response to the SARS-
CoV-2 vaccine. It is crucial to recognize that during the pregnancy-puerperal cycle, women are at a greater risk of severe
COVID-19, and their children are at an increased risk of the detrimental effects of preterm delivery, providing a compelling
aArugduimenencet fToark per iAmwaaryy :p revention.


Pregnancy Covid-19 vaccination concerns.

New studies finding about Covid-19 pregnancy vaccination.

Important questions about pregnancy vaccination should be answered.
FDA guides about pregnancy.
Biography
Pooyan Afzali Harsini was born in 13 June 1988 in Kermanshah. He has Bachelor of Public Health. He s interest in research are: Nutrition,
Cancer prevention, Public Health, Infectious disease, Health Education.

noitcefnI

Marshal Sikandangwa*1, Mary Kagujje1, Nsala Sanjase1,
Clara Kasapo2, Rhehab Chimzizi2, Michael Herce1,3, Nancy
Kasese-Chanda, Monde Muyoyeta1, Patrick Lungu2

Centre for Infectious Disease Research in Zambia, Zambia

Ministry of Health, National TB program, Zambia

University of North Carolina, Zambia
Outcomes for drug susceptible TB retreatment cases in Zambia : A review of
2016-2019 program data
Background:
In 2017, Zambia revised its drug susceptible TB (DS-TB) treatment guidelines to change from an 8 months
streptomycin containing regimen to an all oral 6 months regimen for retreatment TB cases; new and retreatments DS-TB
patients were to take same regimen. We sought to understand the changes in treatment outcomes for retreatment TB
cases since adoption of an all oral 6 months regimen and to compare the treatment outcomes of new and retreatment TB
pInatteiernvtesn. tion:
We analyzed programmatic data, from all the ten provinces in Zambia, of patients on treatment between
2R0e1su6 latsn:d 2019 to determine the TB treatment outcomes stratified by new and retreatment TB cases.
The treatment success rate among retreatment TB cases increased from 82% in 2016 to 89.2% in 2019, mortality
rate reduced from 8.2% to 5.4%; treatment failure was constant at about 1% and loss to follow up reduced from 4.1% to
2.8%. Among new cases, the success rate increased from 88.2% in 2016 to 89.5% in 2019 cohort, the mortality reduced
fCroonmc l5u.6si%on tos: 5 .2%, treatment failure rates were less than 1%.
Overall, there has been an increase in the treatment success rate of both new and retreatment TB cases.
Unfavorable outcomes such as death, loss to follow up steadily decreased.
Outcomes for retreatment notified 2019
Year of T o t a l Treatment Lost to
Success rate Died Not evaluated
notification notified failed follow-up
Treatment outcomes for new notified in 2019
Biography
Marshal Sikandangwa received a diploma in Clinical medicine (Chainama Hills College of Health Sciences - Lusaka, Zambia) in 2002
and a diploma in TB control and epidemiology (Research Institute of Tuberculosis (RIT)   Tokyo Japan )in 2007. In 2017, finished his
Degree in Public Health (Texila American University) and in 2019 Masters in Public Health(Texila American University in conjunction
with Universidad Central de Nicaragua -UCN).
Marshal started working at a medical clinic in 2002 before moving to the district to coordinator TB and Leprosy program in 2005.
The same year (2005), he was promoted to be the provincial coordinator for TB and leprosy the position he had until 2013. In 2013,
he worked as provincial TB/HIV liaison Officer until 2017. In 2018, he joined FHI360 and was seconded to the Ministry of Health
headquarters as the National Multi Drug Resistant Tuberculosis (MDR-TB) Coordinator. He was move to FHI360 national officer in 2019
as national TB/HIV technical officer the position he held until 2020 when he joined Centre for Infectious Disease research in Zambia
as MDR-TB coordinator the position he currently holds. He has passion for TB and has worked in the development of TB materials and
capacity building in the country.

noitcefnI

Shyamapada Mandal*2, Manisha Mandal1

Department of Physiology, MGM Medical College, India

Department of Zoology, University of Gour Banga, India
Exploring the plant-derived natural antimetabolites against pathogenic bacteria
: In silico approaches of drug discovery in combating bacterial infection to
humans
mergence of multiple antibiotic resistance among pathogenic bacteria, and lack of suitable antibiotic choice to combat
them highlight the urgent need of effective alternatives for the treatment of such bacterial infection to humans.
in silico Prunus avium Cajanus
Phytochemicals have been considered as the most useful components of lead molecules in drug discovery. The current
cajan
Estudy performs molecular docking of phytochemicals from sweet cherry ( ) and pigeon pea (
), targeting bacterial enzymes: dihydrofolate reductase (DHFR) and dihydropteroate synthase (DHPS) useful in
Prunus avium
nucleic acid biosynthesis among bacteria. The phytochemicals (small-molecules) which were utilized as the ligands in
Cajanus cajan
docking studies included caffeic acid, p-coumaric acid, sinapic acid and ferulic acid from , and cajaisoflavone,
cajaflavanone and cajanone from .
The anti-DHFR trimethoprim (TMP) and anti-DHPS sulfamethoxazole (SMZ) were used as the reference standards in
molecular docking. The molecules studied through docking were then subjected to pharmacological property analysis.
The top-scored ligands were selected for molecular dynamic simulation to authenticate the thermodynamically stable
binding with the target proteins. The overall findings of the current study signify the usefulness of the phytochemicals
as natural antimetabolites against human pathogenic bacteria, and this would also be valuable in aiding precise drug
discovery from phytochemicals with systematic pharmacological understanding.
Biography
Dr. Shyamapada Mandal is Professor and Head of the Department of Zoology, and Dean (Science), University of Gour Banga, India. He is
interested on infectious diseases, probiotics, and genomics and bioinformatics research. He did pre-PhD, PhD, and post-PhD research
under the guidance of Professor Nishith Kumar Pal at Calcutta School of Tropical Medicine, India.
He has published 118 articles with eight book chapters. He is life member of IAMM and IASR, India, and fellow member of SASS, India.
Eight national academic and research awards have been conferred to him. He has guided 52 post graduate students; supervised three
MPhil and three PhD students, and supervising 6 PhD and one MPhil students. Professor Mandal is among the world s top 2% scientists
as per the survey of the Stanford University, published in PLOS (Public Library of Science) Biology (October, 2020). He is featured in the
top 2% world scientists list for second consecutive time as published by the Stanford University-Elsevier BV (October, 2021).

noitcefnI

Amanda H Cavalheiro*, Andrea Q Ungari
Faculty of Medicine of Ribeir o Preto, Brazil
Adherence, physical limitation and social participation in leprosy patients in a
high-complexity hospital
Background:
Therapies and procedures to improve the quality of life of patients and adherence to treatment is a concern
for the health systems and for health professionals. More studies related to preventive and therapeutic education, using
eOdbujecacttiiovneasl: technologies for health purposes are needed.
To demonstrate the educational instruments developed by the researcher, as animated videos and posts, as
well as the pharmacotherapeutic monitoring of pharmaceutical care, increase the adherence to the treatment of patients
dMiaegthnoosdesd: with leprosy in a high-complexity hospital.
This is a longitudinal study, using quantitative and qualitative assessment tests to assess adherence to treatment
and general knowledge about the disease and quality of life. From the data, educational materials were produced and
tReessteudlt os:n patients. Then, the impact of follow-up and instructional materials on treatment adherence was evaluated.
Treatment adherence increases after the intervention of pharmaceutical care and health education, as per the
Morisky-Green treatment test. The methodology was more effective in male patients with low education than in women,
who already had high adherence. In addition, it was possible to identify that the Morisky-Green and Haynes-Sackett
adhesion tests, used in the work, completely differed in their results, they occur to reflect the use of such tools in research
iCno tnhcel uasreioan. :
It is possible to increase patient treatment adherence through health education programs and pharmaceutical
cKaeryew. ords:
Audience TaEkdeu cAawtioayn:a l tools; Leprosy; Medication Adherence; Pharmaceutical care.


How to manage with patients adherence in pandemic situation.

How to use technologies to improve adherence in patients.

How pharmacists can use their knowledge to help chronic patients.
How to help leprosy patients to be more concerned about their treatment.
Biography
Graduated in Pharmacy-Biochemistry from the University of S o Paulo(USP), Research and Development Analyst for the Medicines,
Cosmetics and Food Industry with project development in the Natural Products area together with USP; Specialist in Pharmacology and
Drug Interactions and Specialist in Teaching in Higher Education. Health Instructor in education programs for patients with chronic
and rare diseases. Taught classes for vocational courses. She has already been a Responsible Pharmacist in a distributor of medicines
and drugstores. She is currently Professor of Pharmacy Technician and is finishing her master s degree at FMRP - USP, working with
leprosy patients.

noitcefnI

Grace Lalana Christopher
Grace Specialist Clinic, South India
Early onset neonatal sepsis
arly onset neonatal sepsis despite a low incidence has a high mortality rate of over 50%, hence early diagnosis and
institution of antibiotics within 24 hours of birth is important to prevent not only the high mortality but also morbidity.
However there is a lack of an ideal confirmatory diagnostic test within 24 hours of birth with 100% sensitivity and 100%
Especificity is challenging to the clinician in making an accurate and early diagnosis of early onset sepsis. Most etiological
pathogens cause in-utero with fetal infections and identification of predisposing high risk maternal, obstetric and neonatal
factors are important as it support a high index of clinical suspicion warranting screening for sepsis.
Multivariate analysis and multiple logistic regression of various antepartum, intrapartum and neonatal factors revealed
that young mothers  24 years, OR 1.53, (95% CI 1.2-2.0) and primigravidae, OR 2.08, (95% CI 1.6-2.7) was highly
statistically significant P>|z|=0.002 and P>|z| <0.001 respectively. Premature Rupture of Membranes (PROM) OR 12.96,
(95% CI 9.5-18.4), P>|z| <0.001 as well as Gestational diabetes OR 2.19, (95% CI 1-1.3), P>|z| <0.008 was statistically
significant. Surprisingly birth by emergency Lower Segment Cesarean Section (LSCS) OR 1.82, (95% CI 1.3-2.5), P>|z|
<0.001, since the usual indication was fetal distress probably due to in-utero infection including neonatal risk factors of
prematurity  36 weeks, OR 2.57, (95% CI 1.8-3.6), P>|z| <0.001 and Low Birth Weight (LBW)  2499g, OR 2.76, (95% CI
2.1-3.7), P>|z| <0.001, and male gender, OR 1.88, (95% CI 1.1-3.0), P>|z| <0.008 were also highly statistically significant.
Presently reported global incidence of neonatal sepsis was is low, less than 4%, while it was 8.9% in present study, clinical
observation despite its limitation and diagnostic hematologic tests including serological markers tests remain the most
practical means to confirm and monitor progress of disease or to withhold antibiotics in uninfected newborns thereby
decreasing the emergence of multidrug resistant pathogens Thus early diagnosis based on presence of two or more high
risk maternal, obstetric and neonatal factors, warrants screening for sepsis in newborns and early antibiotic therapy will
not only save lives but also decrease morbidity of severe lifelong threatening sequelae such as seizures, mental retardation,
blindness, hearing loss etc. The awareness of the role of infection causing high morbidity and mortality in the newborn has
increased dramatically over the past few decades, emphasizing the importance of early diagnosis of early onset neonatal
sepsis.
Biography
Dr. Grace Lalana Christopher completed both her undergraduate M.B.B.S. and postgraduate DCH at reputed Christian Medical College
& Hospital, Vellore, South India, thereafter completed her DNB course from Bangalore. She has qualified for ECFMG (US) currently
valid. She is a Consultant Pediatrician at Grace Specialist Clinic and Founder, CEO of  New Gen Parenting  @www.newgenparenting.
com. She is an eminent speaker in the field of Perinatology and authored several books on Parenting and child care Website: www.
newgenparenting.com. She has published several leading original scientific research papers in pediatrics and new-born care including
innovative  Newborn Resuscitation  and presented papers at several reputed conferences.

noitcefnI

Amarjeet Gambhir
Faculty, Department of Dental & Oral Surgery, Lady Hardinge Medical
College & Associated Hospitals, India
COVID-19 & fungal infections
he outbreak of coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) caused by severe acute respiratory system coronavirus 2 (SARS-
CoV-2) has been sweeping across the globe. It has been associated with a wide range of opportunistic bacterial and
fungal infections. COVID-19 likely increases the risk for fungal infections because of its effect on the immune system and
Tbecause treatments for COVID-19 (like steroids and other drugs) can weaken the body s defenses against fungi. COVIDassociated fungal infections can lead to severe illness and death. The most commonly reported fungal infections in
patients with COVID-19 include aspergillosis, invasive candidiasis, and mucormycosis. Aspergillus species could be an
important cause of life-threatening infection in COVID-19 patients, especially in those with high risk factors such as steroid
use, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, hemopoietic malignancy etc. COVIDassociated pulmonary aspergillosis
(CAPA) usually occurs in patients with severe COVID-19 and can be difficult to diagnose because testing usually involves
obtaining specimens from patients  lower respiratory tract. The treatment of CAPA includes antifungals like voriconazole,
posaconazole, and isavuconazole.
Patients hospitalized for COVID-19 are at risk for healthcare-associated infections (HAIs), including candidemia, or
bloodstream infections caused by Candida. Diagnosis of invasive candidiasis (IC) depends on culture methods including
culture of blood or other samples and nonculture diagnostic tests including mannan and antimannan IgG tests, C. albicans
germ tube antibody (CAGTA), BDG and PCR-based assays. COVIDassociated mucormycosis erroneously referred
to as  black fungus  is another fungal infection which became a major public health problem particularly in India. It is
postulated that COVID-19 associated mucormycosis (CAM) is driven by complex host-microbe interactions. It may affect
the lungs (pulmonary mucormycosis) but more frequently involves the nose, sinuses, eyes & brain (rhino-orbito-cerebral
mucormycosis). Diagnosis is usually made by clinical findings supported by diagnostic nasal endoscopy or contrast-
enhanced MRI or CT scan coupled with microbiological confirmation on direct microscopy, culture or histopathology.
The treatment for mucormycosis frequently involves aggressive surgical intervention and treatment with antifungals,
including amphotericin B, posaconazole, or isavuconazole. Fungal infections resistant to antifungal treatment have also
been described in patients with severe COVID-19. As clinicians, we should be aware of the possibility of fungal co-infections
with COVID-19 to reduce delays in diagnosis and treatment in order to help prevent severe illness and death from these
iAnufedciteinonces. T ake Away:
The presentation will provide an overview of the various fungal co-infections associated with COVID-19 with special

emphasis on:

Causes/predisposing factors.

Pathophysiology & clinical presentation.
Guidelines for diagnosis & management.
Biography
Dr. AMARJEET GAMBHIR graduated in dentistry from GDC, Indore in 2002 & completed his post-graduation in Oral & Maxillofacial
Surgery from NHDC, Mumbai in 2006. He completed his Senior residency from Lady Hardinge Medical College & Hospital, New Delhi in
2009. He worked as a faculty at different dental colleges and was promoted to Professor, Oral & Maxillofacial Surgery in 2016. He again
joined Lady Hardinge Medical College as a Faculty in 2016. He is the co-investigator for  O-PMD Hub , A National Resource Centre for
Oral Potentially Malignant Disorders under the National Oral Health Program, MoHFW, Government of India.

noitcefnI

Corsame, Lester Jay*
Philippine College of Physician, Philippines
Predictors of treatment outcome among drug resistant tuberculosis patient at
the outpatient TB dots facility of Zamboanga city medical center
he Philippines is one of the high tuberculosis burden countries and drug- resistance is widespread in the country
and abroad and threatens the success of TB program. Timely and efficient MDRTD treatment is crucial in preventing
disease transmission and reducing the morbidity and mortality. Review of literature showed disparate predictors of
Ttreatment outcome and only prevalence studies are available in the Philippines. Hence, the findings of this study can
be different among Filipinos. This study aims to determine the predictors of treatment outcomes among drug-resistant
patients in outpatient setting at Zamboanga City Medical Center TB DOTS Center to enhance the TB program and its
outcome.
This study is a retrospective cohort analytical design, which was conducted at the TB DOTS Center of Zamboanga City
Medical Center. Using the data registry book from January 2015 to December 2019, patient s demographic, and clinical
characteristics were reviewed, collected, tabulated and analysis was done using binary regression to determine the
predictors of treatment outcomes among drug-resistant tuberculosis patients. Of the 207 DR-TB patients, only 176 were
p value p value p value
included in the analysis, 120 (68.2%) had successful treatment outcome while 56 (31.8%) had poor treatment outcome.
p values
Age less than 40 years ( = 0.038), absence of diabetes ( = 0.079) and susceptible to isoniazid ( = 0.025)
and streptomycin ( =0.012) were predictors of good outcome while none of the variables were predictors of
mortality. The common drug resistance pattern were Rifampicin-resistant (56.8%), followed by MDR TB (36.4%). The
common characteristics of drug-resistant tuberculosis are male sex, age more than 40 years old, married, living in urban
areas and with history of previous TB treatment. None of the variables were predictors of mortality however, age less than
40 years old, absence of diabetes, TB strains susceptible to isoniazid and streptomycin were predictors of good outcome.
DAurudgi ernescies tTaankt,e t rAewatamy:e nt outcomes, MDR-TB, treatment success, poor outcomes MESH WORDS.

The study results will help determine the risk factors common to Filipino people at high risk for drug resistant

tuberculosis.

The study results will help improve the existing policies and tailor fit to the Filipino people.
Tuberculosis has been a global health concern in the world and Philippines is among the 30 countries with high TB
burden. The results of the study may help determine risk factors that could affect the treatment outcome of drug

resistant TB patients, and this will help improve the management to further enhance the treatment success rates.
This study establishes the baseline data for Filipinos with Drug resistant TB and can be implemented in a wider scale.
Biography
Dr. Lester Jay Corsame finished his residency training in Internal Medicine at Zamboanga City Medical Center. He received his diplomate
degree in 2022. Currently, he is under deployment program of the Department of Health to the rural areas.

noitcefnI

Asit Kumar Chakraborty
Oriental Institute of Science & Technology, India
Indian medicinal phytoextracts to tackle multi-drug resistant bacterial
infections targeting RNA polymerase and DNA topoisomerase
radual increase of multidrug resistant infections is a threat to the human race as MDR plasmids have acquired.>10
mdr and drug efflux genes to inactivate antibiotics. Plants secret anti-metabolites to retard growth of soil and water
bacteria and are ideal source of antibiotics. Six plants derived bacteriocidal organic extracts were selected testing 80
Gmedicinal plants against MDR bacteria. A Cassia fistula saponin bromo-polyphenol compound (CU1) ran fast on TLC and
purified on HPLC C18 column at 3min. CU1 is three times less active than rifampicin in Agar-hole assay. CU1 inhibited
transcription from Escherichia coli as well as Mycobacterium tuberculosis RNA Polymerases. Gel shift assays demonstrated
that CU1 interferes at the open promoter complex formation step. Phytochemicals are unstable and we thought three
Suregada multiflora
possible remedies: (a) search for more active and stable extracts, (b) cultivation of plant in big clay pot keeping in the roof
top located in cities, and (c) plant tissue culture. A single tree of was grown five years in roof top at
Kolkata and its root extracts was found exceptionally active (18 fold than natural sources) against MDR bacteria.
Further, in MS tissue culture media with plant hormones IAA and 6-BA (2.5 g/ml), over-produced active principles
Leishmania donovani, Trypanosoma brucei Plasmodium falciparum
further 2.8 fold. We purified the active principle NU2 by TLC and HPLC, and also confirmed by MASS, NMR and FT-IR. NU2
phytochemical also inhibited some parasites like and .
NU-2 actively inhibited the DNA topoisomerase I and RNA polymerase of Escherichia coli suggesting the modes of action.
Thus, cities of poor nations with population burden should cultivate medicinal plants in small garden or roof top in a similar
way for superbug treatment where common antibiotic therapy fail. This message is urgent and universal as scientists
projected that MDR spreading may claim 10 million people in the Asian countries as we would approach 2050. We think
antibiotic void will continue due to few reasons: (1) MDR genes are accumulated in large conjugative plasmids as well as
chromosome islands with many transposons; (2) the spread of MDR genes in plasmids is increasing at 5%/year and (3)
a critical message has generated to protect symbiosis relation between gut bacteria and human facilitating efficient MDR
genes creation to protect gut microbiota from antibiotics as well as helping vitamin synthesis for human metabolosome.
Biography
Dr. Asit Kumar Chakraborty was performed his PhD at CSIR-Indian Institute of Chemical Biology, Kolkata and awarded PhD degree in
1990 from Calcutta University. He did postdoctoral work at University of California at Berkeley and visiting scientist at Johns Hopkins
University School of Medicine. He was Associate Professor of Biochemistry at OIST, Department of Biotechnology, Vidyasagar University
and now retired.

noitcefnI

Annapurna Ahuja
Department od Periodontics and Oral Implantology, India
Periodontitis and adverse pregnancy outcomes. A possible link
n 1900, William Hunter, a British physician, first developed the idea that oral microorganisms were responsible for a
wide range of systemic condition and he also identified gingivitis and periodontitis as foci of infection. The focal infection
theory, proposed by hunter was based on almost no evidence. Currently, in re-examining the potential association between
Ioral infections and systemic conditions, it is important to determine what evidence is available, and is still needed to
substantiate the association and to validate the possible mechanism of association. So this evidence paper reviews
current knowledge relating periodontitis to preeclampsia and pre term birth(PTB).Thus the Focused question: is  does
pBearcikogdroonutintids :c ause adverse pregnancy outcomes? 
Periodontitis is an inflammatory disease affecting supportive tissues of the teeth, leading to progressive
destruction of connective tissue attachment and the alveolar bone. This destruction is characterized by the formation of a
periodontal pocket. Because of its chronic inflammatory infectious nature, periodontitis has been considered a systemic
exposure implicated with causative agent in variety of systemic diseases and condition. Recent findings have suggested
that periodontal diseases are associated with a higher risk of cardiovascular diseases, atherosclerosis and adverse
pAruedgineannccey Toauktceo Amweasy, s: uch as preterm birth and low birth weight and preeclampsia.


Learning the importance of oral hygiene and effects of periodontitis on systemic health.

Audience shall learn about the effects of oral microorganisms on pregnancy.
Along with seeking advice from Gynecologist one should also consider visiting oral health specialist during pregnancy.
Biography
Prof. Dr. Annapurna Ahuja, studies her Masters of dental surgery from the prestigious college of dental science and hospital, affiliated to
Rajiv Gandhi University of health sciences, Bangalore in 2009. She then joined Dental College as a Teaching Faculty. She has published
more than 40 research articles, 8 text books of her specialty, one chapter contribution. She is a very active part of the research and has
4 copyrights of her work in the field of Periodontics. She is also a renowned poet, has written more than 200 poems. Has a recipient of
Best book award for her debut book, BAPUJI written in Indian Language. Presently she is associated with Hazaribag College of Dental
Sciences & Hospital, as Head of the Department, Dept. of Periodontics & Oral Implants.

noitcefnI

Balamurugan. R MDS (OMFS)
Fellow ICOI (USA) Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon, India
Maxillary mucormycosis treated by maxillectomy : A complication of oroantral
fistula 6 months post-surgery planned for functional endoscopic sinus surgery
(FESS) and palatal finger flap reconstruction
Introduction:
Mucormycosis is an opportunistic fungal infection predominantly caused by the Rhizopus and Mucor
sCpaescei eDse. Tschrei putbiioqnu:i ty of mucormycosis is high with poor prognosis because of the delay in diagnosis and intervention.
A 68 year old male patient who is diabetic since the past 20 years reported with pain and ulcerations
in the maxillary alveolus. Biopsy of the region revealed it to be a mucormycosis which was then operated by performing
a maxillectomy. After six months of surgery, the patient reported back with oroantral fistula, which was further explored
tChornoculguhs ifounnc: tional endoscopic surgery and then soft tissue reconstruction was done using palatal finger flap.
The current case scenario signifies that through early diagnosis and intervention it is possible to achieve
good prognosis and can also remarkably decrease the mortality rate.
Biography
Dr. R. Balamurugan is an Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon and Oral Implantologist from Chennai, India. He initiated his professional
career in the field of dentistry and continued his specialisation in the path of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery (India) and Fellowship in
Oral Implantology (International Congress of Oral Implantologists ICOI, USA). His field of expertise in basic dental treatments, dento-
alveolar surgeries, maxillofacial trauma, dental implants, medical emergencies, pathologies associated with maxillofacial region, TMJ
related disorders. He was awarded as the best PEER REVIEWER by Star Dental Centre Pvt Ltd, India for his sincerity and dedication
towards work by adhering to the timelines with a prompt reviewing process.
He holds various International and National peer reviewed paper publication that adds credit to his career. He is associated with
International and National journals as editor and reviewer board member and he has also been invited as a keynote speaker globally.
He also encourages and motivates the authors to explore with new innovative ideas in the field of research. Currently, he is a researcher
and walks in the right path of motivation by providing a heart of service for the patients as an Oral and Maxillofacial Surgeon in RYA
Cosmo Foundation, Chennai, India. His research interest include: Dentistry; trauma of maxillofacial region; dentoalveolar surgeries;
pathologies of maxillofacial region; bone grafts; dental implants; temporomandibular joint disorders, cleft anomalies, reconstruction
of jaws.
2ND EDITION OF WORLD CONGRESS ON
INFECTIOUS
DISEASES
17-18 ENUJ
POSTERS
DAY 01
Infection 2022

noitcefnI

Seema Mittal*, Surender Kumar
Associate Professor, Microbiology, BPS GMC, Khanpurkalan, India
Professor and Head of Microbiology, BPS GMC, Khanpurkalan, India
Prevalence of rifampicin resistance in pediatric tuberculosis vases in rural area
of Northern India
Background:
Globally, tuberculosis (TB) continues to exact an unacceptably high toll of disease and death among children,
particularly in the wake of the HIV epidemic. Increased international travel and immigration have seen childhood TB rates
increase even in traditionally low burden, industrialised settings, and threaten to facilitate the emergence and spread of
multi-drug resistant strains. While intense scientific and clinical research efforts into novel diagnostic, therapeutic and
preventative interventions have focused on TB in adults, childhood TB has been relatively neglected. However, children
are particularly vulnerable to severe disease and death following infection, and those with latent infection become the
reservoir of disease reactivation in adulthood, fueling the future epidemic. Further Advances in our understanding of TB
iAni mch:i ldren would provide wider insights and opportunities to facilitate efforts to control this ancient disease.
MaterTioa lf ianndd p Mreevtahleondcse: rate of tuberculosis and multi drug resistance tuberculosis in pediatric age group.
This was a retrospective observational study done in department of Microbiology of Bhagat phool
Singh Government Medical college , Khanpurkalan, Sonepat, Haryana during a time period of nine months from January
2021  september 2021. A variety of clinical samples were collected from suspected patients of pediatric age group (0-
14 years) including samples from OPD and IPD patients. These samples were processed for diagnosis of Mycobacterium
tRuebseurlctlse: bacilli via CB-NAAT as per standard protocol and results were recorded both digitally as well as manually.
A total of 1279 various clinical samples were processed, out of which 46 samples were from pediatric age
group. Among these 46 clinical samples , 10 (21.74%) samples came to be positive with Mycobacterium tuberculosis and
resistance to Rifampicin was detected in one(2.17%) sample (Intermediate level). This positivity rate was most prevalent
iCno angcelu gsoiuopn :o f 13-14 years old patients (32.60%) followed by age group 11-12 years old patients (17.4%).
Tuberculosis in children is an epidemiological indicator of recent transmission of Mycobacterium tuberculosis
in the community. Efforts must be made to collect microbiological specimens before initiating treatment whenever possible.
Management by an experienced paediatrics team allows an accurate diagnosis even when microbiologic confirmation is
nKoety pwoosrsdibsl:e .
Audience TaTkueb eArwcualyo:s is, Mycobacterium tuberculosis, Paediatrics, Diagnosis.

This study explains an important role of pediatric age group tuberculosis, in higher prevance rate of tuberculosis
cases in India, which are usually not diagnosed at all. These cases most of the times remain hidden in society and act

as source of infection to other person in contact.
Therefore, refined use of technology, clinical expertise, specific focus on suspected pediatric population for screening
tuberculosis with prompt / continuous treatment can alter this higher prevalence of endemic tuberculosis in India.
Biography
Dr. Seema is a medical microbiolgist graduated her M.D. Microbiology in 2013 from Pt B.D.S PGIMS, Rohtak , Haryana, India. She then
joined the Health university Rohtak as Sr. Resident in department of Microbiology, followed byjoining as Assistant professorship at BPS
GMC, SONEPAT, INDIA. Now she is working at the position of an Associate Professor at the BPS GMC. She has published more than 30
research articles in SCI (E) pubmed and various other indexed journals.

noitcefnI

Rosanova, M T *; Voto C; Carnovale S; Tramonti N; Lema J;
Pinheiro J L; Isasmendi A; Alvarez V; Villasboas R M; Laborde
S, Highton E, Trugman F and Caracciolo B, Juan P. Garrahan
University of Buenos Aires, Argentina
Osteomyelitis in pediatric burn patients in a pediatric burn unit from Argentina
Introduction:
Objective: Osteomyelitis in burn patients is rare.
To describe the clinical, microbiological and evolution characteristics of burned children with osteomyelitis
hGoosapl:i talized in a high complexity hospital.
To describe the clinical, microbiological and outcome of children diagnosed with osteomyelitis hospitalized in a
tMerettiharoyd Ps:e diatric Burn Unit.
Results: Retrospective and descriptive study carried out during the period from January 2007 to January 2017.
Of a total of 600 burned children, 12 presented osteomyelitis (incidence of 2%). Eleven patients presented burns
due to direct fire. The median age was 42.5 months (interquartile range -IQR118 months) and the burned area was
33.5% (IQR 18.5-58%). Osteomyelitis was diagnosed a median of 30 days post-burn. The most frequent locations were
the upper extremities and the calvaria. Fever was the most common clinical manifestation. The most frequently isolated
microorganisms in bone tissue were fungi in 9 patients. All presented compatible pathological anatomy. The median of
tCroenatcmluesniot nw:a s 44.5 days (IQR 34.5-65.5 days). Six patients presented motor sequelae and 1 patient died.
Fungal etiology was the most frequent. Half of the patients presented functional sequelae and only one
patient died.
Biography
Dr. Maria Teresa Rosanova MD. PhD. Pediatric Infectologist Doctor of Medicine from the University of Buenos Aires. Clinical Head of the
Infectious Disease Service Hospital de Pediatr a Juan P. Garrahan.

noitcefnI

Nashwa M. Al-Kasaby*1, Maysaa El Sayed Zaki1, Abdel-
Rahaman Eid2, Amany Y. El Ashry1

Medical Microbiology and Immunology Department, Mansoura Faculty of
Medicine, Egypt

Genetic Unit-Pediatric Department, Mansoura University, Egypt

Clinical Pathology Department, Mansoura University, Egypt
Molecular study of norovirus in pediatric patients with gastroenteritis
cute diarrhea is a common cause of morbidity in children worldwide. Rotavirus, as an etiology of acute diarrhea,
has been decreased after the implementation of vaccine and norovirus has become the most prevalent viral etiology
of acute gastroenteritis. Norovirus is a non-enveloped RNA virus associated with acute gastroenteritis transmitted by
Afecal-oral route in all age group. The aim of the present study was to detect the prevalence of norovirus and genotypes
determination by real-time PCR among children below 18 years as an etiology of acute gastroenteritis and to compare rapid
detection of norovirus by Enzyme-Linked Immunoassay (ELISA) to virus detection by real-time PCR. The research was a
cross-sectional study conducted on children below 18 years complaining of community-acquired acute gastroenteritis.
A stool sample was subjected to direct-antigen detection by ELISA for norovirus and molecular study by real-time
polymerase chain reaction. The study included 200 children with acute gastroenteritis with a mean age of 6.7 3.8 years.
Norovirus antigen was detected by EIA in 34.5% and by real-time PCR in 30.5% of studied children with genotype GII,
the predominant detected genotype (80.97%). Both real-time PCR and antigen detection of norovirus were positive in 43
(70.5%) of the children and negative in 113(81.3%) of the studied children. The sensitivity, specificity, positive predictive
value, negative predictive value and accuracy for antigen detection by ELISA were 70.5%, 81.3%, 62.3%, 86.3% and 78%,
respectively. Comparison between patients positive for norovirus and those negative for norovirus by real-time PCR
rAeuvdeiaelendc en oTna-kseig Anwifiacya:n t difference as regards age, sex, the season of occurrence and residence.

The present study highlights that norovirus prevalence is common among pediatric patients with gastroenteritis

above 5 years with GII genotype as the prevalent genotype.
There was a significant correlation between positive and negative results of antigen detection of norovirus by ELISA

and detection of RNA of norovirus by real-time PCR in stool samples.
However, the screening for norovirus by ELISA has limited sensitivity and needs to be associated with a molecular
method for accurate diagnosis of sporadic cases of gastroenteritis.
Biography
Dr. Nashwa Elkasaby, MSc, PhD is an associate professor of Medical Microbiology and immunology at the University of Mansoura. She
received her, Ph.D. degree in Medical Microbiology with a specialization in Virology 2011 from Faculty of Medicine, Mansoura University,
Egypt. Dr. Nashwa has an experience of more than 15 years in research and teaching and has collaborated with researchers from
different countries. A longside her academic work, Dr. Nashwa was an active member in Infection prevention and control Committee
and Antibiotic Stewardship Programs in Mansoura university hospitals (Egypt) and Sohar hospital (Oman).

noitcefnI

Anas Alyousef*1, Mubarak Alfaresi2, Nenad Pandak3, Nervana
Habashy4

Amiri Hospital, Kuwait

Sheikh Khalifa General Hospital, UAE

The Royal Hospital, Oman

Medical Science Liaison, UAE
Overview of urinary tract infections (UTIs) in adults in five Arabian gulf
countries : A literature review
Background:
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are the most common bacterial infections in adults that compels immediate
treatment to avoid serious complications. However, selecting the appropriate antibiotic therapy is challenging because of
the emerging antibiotic resistance. The purpose of this narrative literature review is to gain knowledge on the prevalence
of UTIs, predominant etiological agents, common risk factors, resistance patterns, and current antimicrobial therapy in
fMiveet hAoradbsi:a n Gulf countries.
A literature search was conducted for articles published from five Gulf countries (United Arab Emirates, Bahrain,
Qatar, Oman, and Kuwait) between October 2011- September 2021 using  PubMed  and  Google Scholar  databases.
Articles were eligible for inclusion if they were retrospective or prospective research studies conducted on adult patients
oRre msuelttas-: analyses of such studies. The search was limited to English language.
UTIs were found to be more common among women than men across the region. The mean age of UTI patients
ranged between 39 and 55.6 years. Uncomplicated and complicated UTIs accounted for 78.70% and 6.40%, respectively.
Renal transplant, diabetes and prolonged catheterization were common risk factors for UTIs. Among renal transplant
recipients, 35.19% had symptomatic UTI and 86% had symptomatic and asymptomatic bacteriuria. The rate of UTIs among
diabetic patients was reported as 35%, detected by urine analysis. Additionally, the overall rate of catheter associated UTI
(CAUTI) varied from 0.4 to 9 per 1000 catheter days.
Escherichia coli was noted to be the primary uropathogen (11.1% to 32.5% for hospital-acquired (HA-UTI) and 61% to
76.5% for community acquired (Ca-UTI)), followed by Klebsiella pneumoniae (6% to 40% for HA-UTI and 16.4% to 23.5%
for Ca-UTI), Acinetobacter baumannii (16.7% to 37.5% for HA-UTI and 0.52% for Ca-UTI), Pseudomonas aeruginosa (2%
to 17.5% for HA-UTI and 0.8% for Ca-UTI), and Staphylococcus aureus (around 3% for HA-UTI and 0.81% for Ca-UTI).
Prevalence of methicillin-resistant S. aureus was found to be 9.09% among overall UTI patients. The major extended
spectrum beta-lactamase (ESBL) producing organisms were E. coli (11.1% to 32.5% for HA-UTI, 23% to 27.4% for Ca-UTI
and 38.4% in CAUTI) and K. pneumoniae (16.6% to 20% for Ca-UTI and 56.7% for CAUTI).
The prevalence of carbapenem-resistant E. coli and carbapenem-resistant K. pneumoniae in Ca-UTI was documented to
be 0.12% to 0.34% and 0.89%, respectively.
The most commonly prescribed antimicrobials included ciprofloxacin, ceftriaxone, and co-amoxiclav. E. coli and K.
pneumoniae exhibited increased resistance against ampicillin (31% - 100%) and cotrimoxazole (42.7% - 100%), and low
rCeosnisctlaunscieo nto: amikacin, piperacillin-tazobactam and meropenem.
Evolving antibiotic resistance is becoming a therapeutic challenge and proving to be an emerging public
threat across the region. There is an evident need for reliable regional epidemiological studies to ascertain the burden
of UTIs, and to assess appropriateness of empiric antibiotic therapy and the impact on patient outcomes in different UTI
sKeetytiwngosr.d Esn: hanced surveillance is recommended to monitor antimicrobial resistance in UTIs.
What will thAed ualutsd, iAenntcieb iloetaicr nre fsriostman ycoeu, Gr uplrf ecsoeunnttariteios,n U?rinary tract infections.

The paper sheds light on the epidemiology and etiology of UTIs in five Gulf countries. The findings highlight the
prevalence of UTIs in specific population groups and shows the difference in etiology between Ca-UTI and HA-UTI
in the region.

noitcefnI


The paper highlights that UTI management should be tailored based on patient risk factors and suspected MDR

bacterial infection.
Commonly prescribed antibiotics demonstrated increased resistance. Therefore, there is a need for novel antimicrobials

to tackle the emerging antimicrobial resistance.
Increasing multi-drug resistance in UTIs across the region is a concern that necessitates judicious use of antibiotics.
Moreover, there is an increase in the prevalence of carbapenem-resistant bacteria among patients with Ca-UTI
which warrants urgent action. The insights shared in this review can be vital in developing effective Antimicrobial

Stewardship (AMS) programs in the region.
The paper calls attention to the need for studies to assess the appropriateness of empiric antibiotic therapy and
impact on patient outcomes. Data obtained from such studies can prove to be fundamental in drafting local guidelines
on the use of antimicrobials and supporting proper management. Such data can also be insightful to researchers
seeking to expand their research on the same topic. Additionally, there is a prerequisite for large epidemiological
studies to assess the burden of UTIs across the region.
Biography
Dr. Anas Alyousef is the Vice President of Kuwait Nephrology Association. He is a consultant in Internal Medicine & Nephrology and
is the Head of Nephrology and dialysis centers at Amiri Hospital, Kuwait. He holds a Canadian Board Certificate in Internal Medicine
(2008) and in Nephrology (2009) from University of British Columbia, Vancouver, Canada.

noitcefnI

Asmaa Al-Rashed*1, Walid Abuhammour1, Zakariya Yahya Al-
Balushi2, Nervana Habashy4

Pediatric Infectious Diseases, UAE

Infectious Disease Consultant, Oman

Department of General Surgery, Kuwait

Medical Science Liaison, UAE
Overview of intra-abdominal infections in five gulf countries : A literature
review
ntra-abdominal infections (IAIs) are the most common cause of morbidity and mortality in surgical emergency patients.
Early appropriate antimicrobial therapy is challenging because of the emerging antimicrobial resistance (AMR) leading
to prolonged hospitalization and increased mortality, morbidity and healthcare costs. The article aimed to review
IeMpeidtheomdios:l ogy, etiology, resistance patterns and current antimicrobial therapy for IAIs in five Gulf countries.
Literature search was conducted for published articles from five Gulf countries (United Arab Emirates, Bahrain,
Qatar, Oman and Kuwait) between January 2011 - September 2021 using  PubMed  and  Google Scholar . Retrospective or
prospective research studies conducted on adult/paediatric patients or meta-analyses of such studies in English language
oRnelsyu wltesr: e included.
From 69 screened studies, 18 met the inclusion criteria. Mean age of IAIs patients ranged between 29.6 - 53.2
years with male predominance (52.9   95.6%) noted across all clinical entities of IAIs. Among IAIs patients, 61% were
appendicitis, peritonitis (55% with single episode and 45% with multiple episodes), intra-abdominal abscess/pelvic
abscess formation (46.4%), perforated duodenal ulcers (20.0%), bowel injury (57.5% for small bowel, 33.1% for colon,
and 9.4% for combined small and large bowel), diverticulitis (3%) and small bowel perforation (1%).
Positive cultures were reported in 46.26% with liver abscess, 62.2% with peritonitis, and 3.32% with patients who
Staphylococcus epidermidis Pseudomonas aeruginosa
underwent appendectomies. The common causative pathogens differed based on the site of infection. The most common
Staphylococcus
cultured bacteria in peritonitis were (21%), (14%) and extended
Streptococcus
spectrum beta-lactamase producers (ESBLs 3%). In Peritonitis patients undergoing peritoneal dialysis,
was the main causative pathogen (14.9%) followed by (13.2%).Klebsiella pneumoniae Streptococcus
melleri Escherichia coli Prevotella bivia Enterococcus bovis
Common pathogens isolated from blood culture of pyogenic liver abscess were (38%),
(11%), (4%), and Escherichia coli(2%). Pseudomonas aeruginosa
Escherichia coli Enterococcus faecalis Klebsiella pneumoniae
For surgical site infections following appendectomies, ESBL represented 60%,
(20%) and (non-ESBL), , (ESBL) were reported to be 5% each.
For pyogenic liver abscess, the mean duration of hospitalization was 13.6   8.1 days, and the mean duration of antibiotic
therapy was 34.7   40.6 days. A mean length of stay of 6.42 days was reported with complicated appendicitis versus 3.82
days with non-complicated appendicitis. Higher in-hospital mortality in patients infected with multi drug resistant (MDR)
bacteria as compared to those infected with other bacterial isolates (16.6% vs. 4.9%). Prolonged antibiotic usage was
reported in patients who refused invasive procedures and received solely intravenous antibiotics for 14 days followed by
4 weeks of oral antibiotics.
Commonly prescribed antibiotics included ceftazidime, vancomycin, cefepime, meropenem, piperacillin/tazobactam,
tCiogenccyluclsinioen a:n d metronidazole. Inappropriate use of empiric piperacillin-tazobactam for peritonitis was reported.
IAIs are heterogenous set that poses significant management challenge. A call for attention to generate more
reliable regional epidemiological studies on IAIs in adults and paediatrics which would provide a strong foundation for
better understanding and management. Enhanced surveillance is crucial to monitor evolving AMR in IAIs and support
stratified management approach. Antimicrobial stewardship efforts focused on IAIs are recommended to guide appropriate
antibiotic usage.

noitcefnI

Audience Take Away:

This review showcases the epidemiology of various infections within IAIs and their etiology considering causative

pathogens differ from one site of infection to another.
The review also highlights the rise in resistant pathogens and their impact on mortality, reflecting the need for novel

antimicrobials.
Inappropriate antibiotic use was noted in some of the studies which warrants steps to be taken for justified use
of antibiotics to curb the rise of MDR bacteria. This demonstrates the importance of implementing antimicrobial

stewardship (AMS) programs to ensure appropriate antibiotic use in the region.
The abstract highlights the scarcity of clinical data for IAIs from the five Gulf countries and emphasizes on the need to
conduct reliable epidemiological studies on IAIs in adults and pediatrics which would provide a strong foundation for

a better understanding and management of IAIs in the region.
It also emphasized that enhanced surveillance is required to monitor increasing AMR in IAIs and tailor management
strategies based on the information gathered.
Biography
Dr. Al-Rashed practices as general and a bariatric surgeon and as an intensivist in the in Al-Amiri Hospital, Kuwait. She is a Fellow of
the Royal college of Surgeons of Canada and a Fellow of the American College of Surgeons. She has received her board certification
and training in general surgery at McGill University, in Montreal, Canada. She is the Assistant Program Director of the Surgical
Foundations Program, a clinical tutor and a lecturer for the Kuwaiti Boards of Surgery and the Critical Care in Kuwait Institute for
Medical Specialization (KIMS).
2ND EDITION OF WORLD CONGRESS ON
INFECTIOUS
DISEASES
17-18 ENUJ
KEYNOTE FORUM
DAY 02
Infection 2022

noitcefnI

Gayatri Tripathi*, R. Bharathi Rathinam, Monalisha
Kumar and Amulya, S.G.
Department of Aquatic Animal Health Management, Maharashtra, India
Prevalence of Vibrio sp. in farmed shrimp and application of probiotics as a
possible strategy for the prevention and treatment
ibrio is a well-known opportunistic bacterial pathogen with a long history of causing substantial economic losses
and mass mortality in shrimp aquaculture. It can cause up to 100% mortality and is estimated to cost the shrimp
industry $3 billion in global losses each year. Early mortality syndrome (EMS), also known as acute hepatopancreatic
Vnecrosis disease (AHPND), is one of the most recent cases of vibrio-related diseases and it has put a significant dent
in Asian shrimp production profits over the last decade. The causative pathogen Vibrio parahaemolyticus is also
Vibrio sp
associated with seafood contamination leading to food-borne illnesses around the world. Studies were conducted to
record the pathogenic profile of ., their virulence, abundance and qdistribution in shrimps farmed in Inland
Vibrio parahaemolyticus V. alginolyticus V. cholerae V.
saline water and if their pathogenicity is influenced by any kind of alterations in salinity. A total of 181 Vibrio isolates
fluvialis V. vulnificus V. furnissii V. campbellii V. harveyi V. proteolyticus
comprised of 12 species i.e., (22.65%), (17.13%), (12.15%),
V. splendidus V. mimicus V. mediterranei
(2.76%), (0.55%), (0.55%) and (0.55%) were recorded from the inland saline
shrimp farms. Among them, 32 Vibrio isolates exhibited positive results on many of the virulence potential tests such
as salt tolerance test, slime formation ability and various hydrolytic assays. Such virulent Vibrio isolates have already
been reported to cause several diseases in shrimp farming. The reports on the presence of multiple drug-resistant
Vibrio sp. in shrimp aquaculture systems emphasizes the need to find alternative measures to control this bacterial
pathogen in shrimp farming. To combat Vibrio infection in shrimp farming, probiotics have acquired popularity as an
Litopenaeus vannamei
alternative to antibiotics and as a bioaugmentation strategy. An experiment was conducted to determine the effect of
probiotic on the health and vibriosis of shrimp . A probiotic feed was used for healthy and vibrio
L. vannamei
challenged shrimp. The results showed that the probiotic-fed shrimp displayed better growth and survival rate than
tWheh acot nwtriloll t ahned a suigdnieifniccaen ltelya rimn pfrroovme dy othuer rperseissteanntcaet oiof n? to this bacterial infection.
  It will help the audience to understand the prevalence of Vibrio pathogen in farmed shrimp and the need for a
strategy to mitigate the disease.
  The presentation will also explore the importance of a probiotics-incorporated diet to combat vibrio infections
that can also reduce the antimicrobial resistance issues in shrimp culture systems. The growth and survival of
experimental animals were found to be higher in the probiotic administrated group than in the control, indicating
the possible solution for preventing and controlling vibriosis.
Biography
An accomplished scientist and experienced professional, armed with a Ph.D. degree in Life Sciences. She is working as a Principal
Scientist in the Aquatic Environment and Health management Division of the Central Institute of Fisheries Education, Mumbai.
She possesses comprehensive experience in aquatic animal diseases & their diagnostic research encompassing embryonic stem
cell biology, nanotoxicology, and immunotoxicology.A recognized researcher in the field of fish disease diagnosis and therapy with
an enviable track record of scientific achievements through publications as well as researching and implementing new scientific
concepts and procedures. More than 50 publications comprising papers in international journals and national journals and book
chapters. She has 1483 citations to her name and has achieved an i10 index of 29.

noitcefnI

Hector Javier Gallardo Valencia*, Maritza Ivonne
Rodriguez Silva
School of veterinary medicine and zootechnics, University of michoacan/
morelia, Mexico
Effect of ozone on hematological parameters
zone therapy has been used for therapeutic purposes since the end of the 17th century, in different modalities
with unexpected therapeutic results in some pathologies. However, there is still a high prejudice in the medical
community in general to the use of this therapy (Schwarts & Martinez-Sanchez, 2012). The objective of the present
Oinvestigation was to compare the effects of ozone applied by rectal insufflation on hematic cells, both the red and
white formulas with different levels of ozone and measured at 24, 48 and 72 hours post application. 3 batches of 5
rabbits each were used in which 3 different doses of ozone were applied by rectal insufflation: the first batch only
oxygen, the second batch 35 micrograms/ml/kg of live weight of ozone and the third batch 70 micrograms/ml. ml/
kg live weight of ozone.
The results of the hemograms were concentrated in tables and the data was entered into the SAS statistical program,
showing in table 5 ANOVA at 24 hours significant differences in leukocytes and segmented neutrophils, likewise at 48
hours significant differences are also observed, maintaining the segmented neutrophils and adding lymphocytes and
monocytes. As conclusions, it can be ensured that, with the administration of ozone rectally, bone marrow and the
immune system are stimulated for the production and release of leukocytes into the blood circulation and the use of
ozone therapy has demonstrated its effectiveness in inducing immune responses and stabilization in the lymphocyte
pAruoddiuecntcioen T.ake Away:
  Importance of the use of ozone therapy.
  Impact of ozone therapy on hematological parameters.
  Effects of ozone therapy on the immune system.
Biography
Dr. Hector Javier Gallardo Valencia studied Veterinary at the Michoacana University, M xico and gradruated as MS in 2001. He has
worked with wild species and private clinical with small animals. He received his PhD degree 1n 2015 at the Oviedo University. He
obtained the position of an Associate Professor. He has published a several research articles.

2ND EDITION OF WORLD CONGRESS ON
INFECTIOUS
DISEASES
17-18 ENUJ
SPEAKERS
DAY 02
Infection 2022

noitcefnI

1Anju Kaushal* and 2Rashed Noor

Assistant Professor (Former), New Zealand

Associate Professor, Independent University Bangladesh(IUB), Bangladesh
Changing microbiota in hospitalized patients increase the COVID-19 severity, a
possible cause of developing the dysregulated immune response- A literature
study
uman physiological homeostasis and onset of the disease, is largely depend on the interactions among resident
Faecalibacterium prausnitzii, Eubacterium rectale bifidobacteria
microbiome of skin, oral cavity, respiratory tract, gastrointestinal system, genital area, and host s protective immunity.
Gut probiotics like and , influence the immunomodulatory
Hsignaling, were noted to be depleted in hospitalized patients even after the disease resolution than healthy individuals.
IBD is induced by SARSCoV-2, could stimulate the severity events via alteration of the gut microbiota during/ after the
respiratory infection. The viral RNA signature in the faecal samples of recovered patients and its presence for longer
period, even after the clearance of the virus from respiratory tract, is suggestive of dysbiosis leading to the poor prognosis
of COVID-19 in ICU patients.
GM plays a significant role to stimulate the modulated antiviral immune response against invading pathogens regulating
Bacteroidaceae, Lachnospiraceae Ruminococcaceae
the physiological homeostasis. GM profile of COVID-19 patients has revealed the drastic depletion of dominant families
Enterococcus, Staphylococcus, Streptococcus, Serratia
of commensals viz., and , were reported to be substituted with
etc.; consequently, developing the dysfunctional activities of Th1-
Th2 cells along the lung-gut axis exchanging microbes & other toxic metabolites and translocating them to the other body
organs too. It is also speculated that the gut virome and bacteriophages could also interfere in maintaining / or disrupting
the homeostasis. Excessive secretion of chemokines and cytokines cause ARDS, interstitial pneumonia and organ failure.
Virome/ and microbiome also interact with immune cells to regulate the immune signaling mechanisms. Therefore, it is
iAmupdeierantcivee T taok beu Ailwd astyr:a tegies to develop novel therapeutics in controlling these hyperinflammatory severity events.

Transitional microbiota during respiratory infections, could interfere with changing immune signals responsible for

causing COVID-19 severity along with secondary infections.
Microbiome research is on the top of the headlines in the current timings, the researchers can utilize this new tool to

study their impact in many communicable and non-communicable diseases.
The studies conducted on dysbiosis occurred in hospitalized patients, have shown that there would be tremendous
opportunities to translate this knowledge into the practical solutions, such as, impact of the interactions of SARS
CoV-2 with enteric cells and its outcome in patients with asymptomatic and symptomatic IBDs. Development of
new biomarkers causing dysbiosis would help develop new diagnostics. New treatment discoveries using various

combination of commensals may control the hyperinflammatory response and poor prognosis of the disease.
Implication of long-term presence of viral RNA in feces and dysbiosis and their relationships with long COVID-19
symptoms.
Biography
Dr. Anju Kaushal received her MSc. Microbiology from Central Research Institute, Kasuali, India in 1993 and awarded with PhD
Microbiology from Panjab University, Chandigarh, India in 2003. She worked in various scientific & medical institutes and companies in
India and New Zealand. Her expertise is in Science and Technology, R&Ds, Productions and QA/QC in the field of biologicals, diagnostics
and academia. She worked on Rabies, Aspergillus, Candida, HIV, enzymes and fermentation technologies. Her area of interest includes
vaccines, sera & diagnostic development & production and on novel therapeutics on advancing technologies. She also attained, more
than six years of experience in Business Management, Brand & Marketing, Communication & Information and as a Freelancer- she
guided many PhDs and scientists in their careers. She has published 12 articles in Scientific Journals and more than 40 articles on
LinkedIn.

noitcefnI

Taif Shah
Faculty of Life Science and Technology, Kunming University of Science and
Technology, China
Pathogenesis of SARS-CoVmycobacterium tuberculosis coinfection, their
prevention, and treatment
oronavirus disease-2019 (COVID-19), caused by SARS-CoV-2, is an infectious disease that poses severe threats to global
public health and significant economic losses. The COVID-19 global burden is rapidly increasing, with over 246.53
million COVID-19 cases and 49.97 million deaths reported in the WHO 2021 report. People with compromised immunity,
Csuch as tuberculosis (TB) patients, are highly exposed to severe COVID-19. Both COVID-19 and TB diseases spread primarily
through respiratory droplets from an infected person to a healthy person, which may cause pneumonia and cytokine
storms, leading to severe respiratory disorders. The COVIDTB coinfection could be fatal, exacerbating the current
COVID-19 pandemic apart from cellular immune deficiency, coagulation activation, myocardial infarction, and other organ
dysfunction. This study aimed to assess the pathogenesis of SARS-CoVMycobacterium tuberculosis Coinfections. We
briefly overview COVID19-TB coinfection and discuss SARS-CoV-2 host cellular receptors and pathogenesis. In addition,
we discuss M. tuberculosis host cellular receptors and pathogenesis. Moreover, we highlight the impact of SARS-CoV-2 on
TB patients and the pathological pathways that connect SARS-CoV-2 and M. tuberculosis infection. Further, we discuss the
impact of BCG vaccination on SARS-CoV-2 cases coinfected with M. tuberculosis and the diagnostic challenges associated
with the coinfection.
National Health Commission of the People s Republic of China has recommended certain TCM formulas, namely Jinhua
Qinggan granule (JHQGG), Lianhua Qingwen granule (LHQWG), Qingfei Paidu decoction (QFPDD), Xuanfei Baidu granule
(XFBD), Xuebijing injection (XBJ), and Huashi Baidu granule (HSBD) for treating COVID-19 infected individuals. Among
these six TCM formulas, JHQGG and LHQWG effectively treated mild/moderate and severe COVID-19 infections. XFBD
therapy is recommended for mild COVID-19 infections, while XBJ and HSBD effectively treat severe COVID-19 infections. The
internationalization of TCM faces many challenges due to the absence of a clinical efficacy evaluation system, insufficient
research evidence, and a lack of customer trust across the globe. Therefore, evidence-based research is crucial in battling
this infectious disease. This review summarizes SARS-CoV-2 pathogenesis and the history of TCM used to treat various
viral epidemics, with a focus on six TCM formulas. Based on the evidence, we also dis- cuss the composition of various
TCM formulas, their underlying therapeutic mechanisms, and their role in curing COVID-19 infections. Furthermore, we
hAiugdhileignhctee dT athkee e Affwicaayc:y and side effects of single prescriptions used in TCM formulas.

In this presentation, I will discuss the pathogenesis of SARS-CoVM. tuberculosis coinfections, SARS-CoV-2 host

cellular receptors, and M. tuberculosis host cellular receptors.
I will also highlight the impact of SARS-CoV-2 on TB patients and the pathological pathways that connect SARS-CoV-2
and M. tuberculosis infection. Further, I will discuss the impact of BCG vaccination on SARS-CoV-2 cases coinfected

with M. tuberculosis and the diagnostic challenges associated with the coinfection.
Moreover, I will highlight the importance of different Chinese Traditional Medicines (TCMs) in the effective treatment

of COVID-19 patients.
This will help the audience to understand SARS-CoV-2 and M. tuberculosis infection process and their prevention and
possible treatment.
Biography
Dr. Shah studied Microbiology at Hazara University, Pakistan, and graduated MS in 2015. He then joined the research group of Prof. Cui
Xiuming at the Faculty of Life Science and Technology, Kunming University of Science and Technology (KUST), Kunming, Yunnan, China.
He received his Ph.D. degree in 2021 at the same institution. He then joined the research group of Prof. Xia Xueshan at the same faculty
and institution for his postdoctoral fellowship program. He has published more than 25 SCI research articles in well-reputed journals.

noitcefnI

Sayan Bhattacharyya*, Atul Raj, Amit Banik
Department of Microbiology, AIIH&PH, India
Urinary tract infections : A persisting public health concern
Introduction:
Urinary tract infections (UTI) are still very common in community as well as nosocomial setting. It is often
found to have a seasonal occurrence. They are more common in adult females as compared to males. Escherichia coli is the
pMraetdeormiailnsa annt dp amtheothgeond sc:a using UTI.
We collected available information on internet and also presented our own experience regarding
the common uropathogens and their susceptibility patter. Samples came from the OPD and were inoculated on CLED agar
and incubated at 37 C overnight, and also observed microscopically at 40X for WBCs, crystals and bacteria. A cut-off

cRoelsounlyt sc:o unt of 10 CFU per ml was taken as significant bacteriuria.
UTI was significantly more common in females than males. In females, age of patients affected by UTI ranged
Escherichia coli
from 3 years to 60 years. The single male patient was 68 years old. Over a 1- year period, the ratio of females: males
Staphylococcus aureus Enterococcus E. coli
having UTI in community as evident from OPD samples, was 13:1. is the commonest uropathogen in
Staphylococcus aureus
females, followed by and spp. About 75% of uropathogenic were resistant to
Enterococcus fecalis
Nitrofurantoin, a common drug prescribed in OPD for UTI. All the strains isolated, were MRSA. In
mCoanlecsl uthsieo snin: gle uropathogen found was .
Urinary tract infections are very common in community, and prescribing empirical drugs need to be based
on antibiotic susceptibility data. Even in the community, due to illicit and over-the-counter antibiotic usage, resistance to
cAoumdmieonnc eu Troapkaet hAowgaeyn:s is now high.


UTI is very common.

It should not be neglected.

A AMR data on Uropathogens in a given area is needed.
Explain how the audience will be able to use what they learn? It will be helpful for students, clinicians and researchers

since they will get to know clinico-microbiological correlation.
How will this help the audience in their job? It will help them do their work and also have good publications, and

thereby help in securing job.

Is this research that other faculty could use to expand their research or teaching? Yes, definitely.
Does this provide a practical solution to a problem that could simplify or make a designer s job more efficient? Yes, it

can help devise simpler urine culture or AMR techniques.

Will it improve the accuracy of a design, or provide new information to assist in a design problem? Yes.
It will be helpful for reading of students and also help in epidemiological studies on Uropathogens.
Biography
He did MBBS from Medical College, Calcutta, MD (Microbiology) from: PGIMER, Chandigarh. He has Post-MD working experience: 14
years. Presently he is working as Associate Professor, Department of Microbiology, All India Institute of Hygiene and Public Health
(AIIH&PH), Kolkata. He is reviewer and editorial board member of many medical journals and Life member: IAMM, SIHAM (ISMM), etc.
He received awards: (a) 1st prize in English essay competition on  One health and Rabies , organized by Pashudhan Praharee, 2021. (b)
Second prize in oral category in STMIDI TROPICON, 2018, Kolkata. His research interest include: Mycology, Bacteriology, Antimicrobial
resistance.

noitcefnI

Amit Kumar Kesharwani*1,2, Dinesh Singh1 and
Anupama Sharma Avasthi2

ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute, India

Amity University, India
Whole-genome sequencing and comparative analysis of Indian race 4 of
xanthomonas campestris pv. campestris causing black rot disease in brassica
oleracea var. capitata
Xanthomonas campestris campestris
X. campestris campestris X.
pv. is a causative agent of black rot disease of cruciferous crops. A whole- genome
campestris campestris Brassica oleracea var. capitata
sequence of any race of pv. has not been reported from India. The isolate Xcc-C7, race 4, of
pv. was isolated from cabbage ( ) from Bengaluru, in the southern
parts of India. Whole-genome sequence data were generated by the next-generation sequencing based single-molecule
real-time sequencing (SMRT) techniques. The complete genome assembly was composed of 5,121,051 bp and has a total
GC content of 64.98%. Of 4,493 total genes, 4,347 CDS and 4,217 genes with assigned function were predicted in Xcc-C7
strain. The profiles of 146 RNA encoding genes were identified, including 6 ribosomal RNA-encoding genes, 54 transfer
RNA encoding genes, and 86 noncoding RNAs.
X. campestris pv. campestris
This whole-genome sequence data has been deposited in the NCBI Gen Bank database (CP077958). The comparative
analysis of genomic features of Indian race 4 with genomes of four other strains (namely, B100,
8004, CFBP5817, and ATCC33913) elucidates that the Indian race 4 is closely related to the Chilean strain CFBP5817.
Furthermore, 19 genes of Xcc-C7 strain were identified as putative candidate genes that may play role in adaptation
of cabbage as a host. Found in common with genes of strain 8004, which were validated genes of pathogenicity. The
X. campestris
phylogenetic tree of whole genome assemblies of the five strains showed that Xcc-C7 is closely related to CFBP5817, as
. campestris X. campestris . campestris
compared with B100, ATCC33913, and 8004, suggesting that both strains CFBP5817 and Xcc-C7 belong to
X. campestris . campestris
pv race 4. This study will improve our knowledge of genomic diversity in pv and pave
the way for research on host pathogen interactions (crucifer crops  pv ) to develop resistance in
cAuuldtiiveantecde BTraakses iAcawcaeya:e crops.

X. campestris . campestris.
The whole-genome sequence will be used to study the diversity, geographical changes and host specific development

of pathogenicity genes in pv
The outcomes of the study will be used to study the host-pathogen interaction to develop the resistance in Brassicaceae

crops.
The comparative analysis of genomic features of Indian race 4 of Xcc with other strains will also enhance the
  X. campestris . campestris
understanding of host specific development of disease in crucifer crops.
Availability of genome resources of pv from India.
Biography
Mr. Amit Kumar Kesharwani Post-graduated in Microbiology from Gurukul Kangri Vishwavidyalaya, India in 2012. He has his expertise
in microbiology, plant pathology and plant-microbe interaction. He then joined prestigious research laboratories in India to learn and
gained experience in the field of Plant pathology and Biotechnology during 2012-2018. His research work enhances the understanding
of bacterial pathogenesis in host. He has joined the research group of Dr. D. Singh at ICAR-Indian Agricultural Research Institute and Dr.
A.S. Avasthi, Amity University, India to pursuing his Ph.D. degree in Biotechnology since 2018. He has published more than 6 research
articles in SCI(E) journals & recipient of Junior and Young Scientist Awards.

noitcefnI

Rehab Mahmoud Abd El-Baky1,2,*, Esraa R. Shady2,
Fatma Y. Ahmed1 and Hala Rady Ahmed1

Professor of Microbiology & Immunology, Faculty of pharmacy, Minia
University, Head of Microbiology & Immunology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Deraya
University, Egypt

Department of Microbiology and Immunology, Faculty of Pharmacy, Minia
University, Egypt
COVID-19 associated fungal infections due to the disturbance in infection
control measures
evere acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus-2 (SARS-CoV-2) pandemic is still difficult to be controlled by the
emergence of new variants which are considered a great challenge worldwide. Disturbance in infection control
guidelines implementation, use of steroids, strong antibiotics, hospital crowdedness and repeated use of oxygen masks
Sduring the management of critically ill COVID-19 patients lead to the increase in the rate of opportunistic infections. So,
patients need to fight both the virus with its different variants and opportunistic pathogens including bacteria and fungi
especially patients with diabetes mellitus, malignancy, or those who undergo hemodialysis and receiving deferoxamine.
During the pandemics, the emergence of many cases of Mucormycosis fungal infection was observed in many different
countries. Delayed and difficult diagnosis, the need for surgical debridement of necrotic tissues, controlling the progression
of the disease, difficulty in intubation and the management of renal impairment that results from prolonged antifungal
therapy are the main challenges regarding Mucormycosis. We will discuss risk factors that increase the chance of the
iAnufedciteinonce b Ty aokpep oArwtuanyi:s tic pathogens especially fungal pathogens, recent challenges, and control measures.


Overview on COVID-19 pandemic.

Risk factors increasing the chance of developing secondary bacterial and fungal infections.

Mucormycosis associated with COVID-19 infection.
ICU unit s environment and the implemented infection control measures as the first line of protection against infection.
Biography
Professor Rehab Mahmoud Abd El-Baky studied pharmaceutical science at Faculty of Pharmacy, Assuit University. She received PhD
degree in 2009, Minia University, Egypt. she obtained the position of professor at Minia University. She has published more than 70
research articles.

noitcefnI

Ambresh S Badad*, Biju Vasudevan
Department of Dermatology, India
Rare a typical subcutaneous fungal infections
mergence of a typical fungal infections rare opportunistic fungal infection caused by saprophytes of genera such as
MetFhuosdasr:i um, Paecilomyces, Scedosporium, Penicillium, Scopulariopsis Acremonium, and similar fungi.
We report an instance of 3 cases of atypical fungal infections first in a 50-year-old woman, known to have
diabetes, who presented with multiple raised lesions on the upper back of two years  duration. Second in a 33 years old
mCoanlec lpuastiioennts :a nd third in 36 year old male HIV+ve patient.
There is emergence of rare opportunistic fungal infections of Dermatological importance. we should look
for these infections in immunosuppression. These patients have substantial morbidity and can be best treated with
aAgugdrieesnsicvee Taanktiefu Anwgaaly t:h erapy.

Audience will be made aware about emergence of rare opportunistic fungal infections in immunosuppression like

HIV, Diabetes, malignancy.

As these patients have substantial morbidity.
Treating physicians will be able to diagnose and best treat with aggressive antifungal therapy and reduce morbidity
and mortality.
Biography
Dr. Ambresh S Badad Studied MBBS from MRMC, Kalburagi RGUHS Bangalore and did his MD from prestigious Armed Forces Medical
College (AFMC), Pune in 2013.He then did DNB from NATBOARD New Delhi. presently working as Associate Professor at MRMC,
Kalburagi and is the DIRECTOR of Dr Badad s Skin Eye & LASER Care Centre, KALABURAGI, KARNATAKA, INDIA. He has published
more than 40 research articles in National and International journals, and has written 2 chapters and edited a book in Dermatology. He
is invited speaker at various National and International conferences. He has been awarded with Raising Star Award in WCD, Milan Italy
2019, Global Education Award 2013 New Delhi India and Young Dermatologist Award 2021 Bangalore India.

noitcefnI

Rohit Kothari
Department of Dermatology, Command Hospital Air Force, India
Clinical and cytokine profile in Type-2 reaction in leprosy in response to
thalidomide : A randomized controlled trial
Background:
Leprosy is a chronic granulomatous disease caused by Mycobacterium leprae (M. Lepra). Reactions may
interrupt its usual chronic course. Type-2 leprosy reaction or erythema nodosum leprosum (ENL) is an acute event which
is type-III hypersensitivity response and manifests clinically as tender evanescent skin-colored or erythematous nodules
and systemic features. Various cytokines like TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma may be increased in ENL along with CD-64 which
may be overexpressed due to massive influx of neutrophils during this reaction. Thalidomide is considered the drug of
choice for type-2 lepra reaction. We tried to extrapolate these facts in the treatment of Leprosy reactions in the form of
rOebdjueccttiiovne :o f these molecules following Thalidomide use and therefore predicting response and prognosis.
To find a correlation between TNF-alpha, IFN-gamma and CD-64 expression on circulating neutrophils
fMolelothwoidngo lTohgayl:i domide treatment and predicting response and prognosis in cases of Type-2 lepra reaction.
This randomized controlled trial consisted of fifty confirmed cases of type-2 leprosy reaction and fifty age,
sex and area of residence matched healthy controls. It was conducted in a tertiary care hospital in Bengaluru, India. The
diagnosis of leprosy was made by the presence of cardinal features in the form of pale or red skin patch with definite loss
of sensation, thickened or enlarged peripheral nerves with sensory and/or motor deficit, and positive slit skin smear for
M. Lepra bacillus. Type-2 reaction was diagnosed in case the leprosy patient developed tender evanescent skin-colored or
red nodules with systemic symptoms and neutrophil leukocytosis. Blood samples and skin biopsy were taken at baseline
and on 14th day after Thalidomide therapy in the treated patients and subjected to histopathology, immunohistochemistry,
immunofluorescence, Reverse Transcriptase-Polymerase Chain reaction (RT-PCR Quantitative) and flow cytometry. All
pRaetsiuenlttss: with ENL responded well to Thalidomide and the lesions resolved within 1-2 weeks.
TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma are increased in almost all cases of type-2 reaction. CD-64 expression is also
upregulated in type-2 reaction and down regulated in patients who received Thalidomide and showed favorable clinical
rCeosnpcolnussei.o Tnh: ere was significant correlation of increased CD-64 expression with the severity of reaction.
TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma are sensitive markers of type-2 reaction, however, did not correlate with treatment
response to Thalidomide and hence may be used as screening biomarkers for reaction. CD-64 expression on neutrophils
may be an early biomarker for diagnosis, prognosis and clinical response to Thalidomide and it is not time-consuming as
well. We also propose that anti-CD 64 antibodies may become one of the treatment modalities in type-2 reactions in future
where Thalidomide is contraindicated or is less favored especially in childhood leprosy cases <12 years where safety data
oAfu Tdhieanlidceo mTaidkee iAs wlimayit:ed and in pregnant females.

TNF-alpha and IFN-gamma are sensitive markers of type-2 reaction and may be used as screening biomarkers for

reaction.
CD-64 expression on neutrophils may be an early biomarker for diagnosis, prognosis and clinical response to

Thalidomide.

Early diagnosis of type-2 reaction can significantly reduce the morbidity in leprosy cases.
The response to treatment as assessed by these investigations may help in deciding the correct treatment and timely

change if a patient is not responding.
This research may be further be expanded by using various other cytokines/chemokines in type-1/2 reaction, healthy
contacts or other scenarios for early diagnosis and prognosis in leprosy.

noitcefnI

Biography
Dr. Rohit studied MBBS and MD Dermatology at Armed Forces Medical College, India and graduated as MD in 2021. He then joined the
department of Dermatology, Command Hospital Air Force Bengaluru as Senior Resident. He has won several national and state level
quizzes during his residency. He has been the quiz master of various national level quizzes as well and has published more 16 research
articles in PubMed indexed journals including high impact one s. He has presented at various national level forums and has many
upcoming national and international level presentations as well.

noitcefnI

Mohamad-Said Almasri*, Rashed Alqaisi, Mohammad
Al-Shagahin, Waqar Al-Kubaisy, Ahmad Aljarajreh,
Hani Al-Shagahin
Faculty of Medicine, Mutah university, Jordan
Risk factors and characterization of post COVID-19 syndrome, in Jordan
ontroversial information about the sequelae of COVID-19 after recovery or post-COVID-19 syndrome(PCS). Whereas
considerable studies have been done on COVID-19, proportionally, scarcity of literature addressing the PCS,
particularly the risk factors causing this syndrome. Determining the prevalence, most common manifestations of PCS, and
Cthe possible related risk factors is an important issue. A cross-sectional, online questionnaire-based study was conducted.
This questionnaire was posted to the Association of  My experience with COVID-19  in Jordan. Socio-demographic, as well
as COVID 19 illness information was collected, from 657 COVID-19 recovered patients at least three months after illness
started. PCS prevalence was 71.9%, where the patient experienced, at least one PCS symptom.
Most common symptoms including dyspnoea, fatigue, taste and smell impairment, cough, and depression. Six factors
were found to be significantly increasing the risk of PCS (using OR, 95% CI); female (2.06, 1.409-2.856), aging  30 (1.64,
1.16-2.33), DM (2.978, 1.08-8.21) hypertension, (2.22, 1.118-4.423), respiratory disease (2.33, 1.21-4.501), and neuro-
psychological disturbance during illness (3.79, 2.574-5.573). Those patients showed also a significantly higher rate of
post-COVID-19 syndrome than their counter groups. Therefore, females, aging  30, comorbidity, and neuropsychological
disturbance during illness, are considered as a risk group for PCS. Thus, psychological and medical support is highly
rWechoamt wmielnl daeudd ideunrcineg l eaanrdn a ffrteorm th me ye ppirseosdeen ptaarttiiocnu?la rly for the risk groups.

The COVID-19 infection management should not be only during the acute episode has to continue several months

after the recovery of the patient.
The Post COVID-19 (PCS) prevalence is high, (71.8%) in Jordan and six factors were found to be significantly increasing

the risk of PCS.
The PCS period requires not only scientific study and investigation but also needs early interventions including

rehabilitation.
We have to start steps in preparing for this unavoidable problem to improve the health care system and enhance the
management of patients during the PCS period.
Biography
Mr. Mohamad Said Almasri, final year medical student at Mutah university, Jordan. He was the president of the medical club 2019-2020.
He has published an article as a first author as a student and participated as an oral presenter in a regional conference.

noitcefnI

J.A.A.S. Jayaweera* and W.W. Kumbukgolla
Department of Microbiology, Rajarata University of Sri Lanka, Sri Lanka
Clinical exposure and methicillin-resistant staphylococcus aureus (MSRA)
colonization among medical students, rajarata university of Sri Lanka
Staphylococcus aureus
edical students who engage in clinical learning in healthcare settings can be potential methicillin-resistant
(MRSA) carriers. This is a descriptive cross-sectional study having a follow-up approach. Three
batches of medical students who were studying at the Faculty of Medicine and Allied Sciences, Rajarata University of Sri
st rd th
MLanka (1 , 3 and 5 study years of MBBS course) were screened for nasal and axillary MRSA colonization. The first-year
students were screened before and 6 months after clinical learning. The knowledge of the students about infection control
was scored (percentage) using a questionnaire in the one week before and later one year after the hospital exposure. Data
was compared using two-sample t test.
The percentage of MRSA colonization was 6.36% (7/110) and 49.57% (59/119) before clinical exposure and after 2.5 years
of exposure, respectively (p<0.012). The percentage of correct responses obtained by the students for the questionnaire
about infection control was 28% and 66.9% one week before the exposure to the hospitals and one year after the exposure
to the hospitals, consecutively. MRSA carriage was significantly associated with the time duration of the clinical training
of the medical students. The knowledge of students about infection control was significantly inadequate one week before
tAhued hieonspciet aTl aekxep oAswuraey :a nd they have gained the knowledge only after being exposed to the hospitals.

MRSA colonization among medical students is a huge problem and infection control specialists have to pay special

attention to mitigate cross transmission.
Limited studies have done to assess the MRSA colonization among medical students and to minimize the colonization

frequency adherence to meticulous infection control practices have to be streamlined.

Also clinical audits have to focus towards medical students to assess hand hygiene and other infection control practices.
This in turn will be helpful to strengthen the infection control practices among young doctors.
Biography
Dr. J.A.A.S. Jayaweera acquired his MD in medical microbiology and MPhil in medical virology. Dr. Jayaweera has over ten years of
research experience in microbiology, biochemistry, nano-biotechnology, complementary and alternative medicine, and biostatistics. He
has so far published more than 30 research articles in international peer-reviewed journals. He has won several international awards,
and he is serving as a reviewer for many reputed groups of journals in the Global Journal of Medical Research and BMC antimicrobials
and infection control. Further, he is an honorary editor in the Annals of clinical immunology and microbiology journal and the chief
editor in Asian journal of dermatological sciences.

noitcefnI

Marah El-Tahir El-Beeli*1, Yahya M. Al-Farsi1, Abdullah Balkhair2,
Zakariya Al-Muharmi2, Samir Al-Adawi3

Department of Family Medicine and Public Health, Sultan Qaboos University, Oman

Department of Infection Control, Sultan Qaboos University, Oman

Department of Behavioral Medicine, Sultan Qaboos University, Oman
Five-year prevalence of hospital acquired blood stream infections in a tertiary
hospital in Oman : A cross-sectional study
Background:
Several reports have emerged addressing the burden and the prevention of hospital acquired bloodstream
infections (HA-BSI); however, they have been largely limited to developed countries. In Arab countries, however, few
studies have emerged on various aspects of HA-BSIs. To our knowledge, there have been no reports of the prevalence rate
of HA-BSI among admitted patients from Oman. This study aims to explore the HA-BSI prevalence estimates over selected
socio-demographic characteristics among admitted patients at a tertiary hospital in Oman over five years of follow-up.
TMheet hreogdiso:n al variations in Oman were also examined in this study.
This hospital-based cross-sectional study reviewed reports of colonoscopies performed over 5- years of
retrospective follow-up at a tertiary hospital in Oman. HA-BSI prevalence estimates were calculated over age, gender,
governorate, and time of follow-up. Cumulative frequency of participants with single and mixed infections and types of
cRaeussualttisv:e micro-organisms of HA-BSIs were also obtained.
A total of 1246 HA-BSI cases were enumerated among 139,683 admissions to SQUH during the five years of
retrospective follow up, yielding an overall HA-BSI prevalence estimate of 8.9 cases per 1000 admissions (95%CI: 8.4,
9.4). Gender-specific HA-BSI prevalence among males was higher than that among females (9.3 vs. 8.5). The age-specific
HA-BSI prevalence estimates started as relatively high at group aged 15 years or less (10.0), and then declined as age
increased to 36 to 45 years (7.0) when it started to increase steadily with increasing age to the group aged 76 or more
(9.9). Regional HA-BSI prevalence was highest among admitted patients who resided in Dhofar Governorate (11.8) while
the lowest was among patients from Buraimi governorate (5.3). Over the 5-years of follow-up, there was a slow-declining
rCeodnuccltuiosino onf HA-BSI prevalence.
: The study provides supportive evidence for a varying slow reduction in HA-BSI prevalence over age
categories and years of follow up; and depicted the variations of gender-specific CRC prevalence estimates over increasing
age categories. The study calls for further reinforcement of infection prevention and control measures to reduce these
rKaetyesw fourrdthse: r.
AcknowledHgmosepnittal acquired bloodstream infections, HA-BSI, Prevalence, Oman.
: The authors would like to thank the Infection Control nurses and staff at the Hospital Information
SFeurnvdiciensg w Shtaot pemroevnidted guidance in data collection from patient records.
: The research and publication of this article was funded by Deanship of Postgraduate Studies and
Research, Sultan Qaboos University, Muscat, Oman.
Biography
Dr. Marah El-Tahir El-Beeli from Sultan Qaboos University, United Arab Emirates.

noitcefnI

Abdullah Ali Abdullah Gafer
Ministry of public health, Yemen
Prevalence cholera during Juanary December 2020 in Hudiedah city, Yemen
emen has recently faced the largest cholera outbreak in the world started ate the end of 2016. By the end of 2017 the
cumulative reported cases from all governorates reached 777,229 cases with 2,134 deaths. Al Hudeidah was one of
the most affected areas where 88741 (18%) cases with 244 (12%) death were reported. To study Profile of suspected
YcMheotlheroad p:atients in Hodeidah city.
A retrospective descriptive study was carried out by using secondary  analysis of available data collected from
(RDeTsCuslt)s, :( ORCs) and other health facilities by department of epidemiological surveillance   Al Hodeidah health office.
A total of 10139 suspected cholera patients were included in the study whereas the average age of study subjects
was 22.7 years where standard deviation (SD) 18.8 most affected age groups were (5-14),(15-30),(<5) the predominant
of the study subjects from Al Hudeidah city (81.3%) from Al-Hali. Cases starts to appear in week 1 reaches a peak in week
3C4o nacnldu sthioenn: s lowly decreases. 24 suspected cholera cases were culture positives.
Cholera is one of the urgent health problems in Al Hudeidah city, Cholera distribution is not gender sensitive,
the most affected age group is (5-14) years, followed by (15-30 ) then under five. The peak of cholera suspected cases is
registered in weeks 34.Confirmed cholera cases by culture are 24 from 167 specimen tested whereas 186 are positive by
cRheocloemram ReDnTd. ations:
More cholera control interventions are necessary and urgent to eradicate it. More field related
rAeusdeaiernchc em Tuaskt eb eA wcaaryri:e d out to guide control and management interventions.


To identify epidemiological curve of cholera cases in Hudiedah city, Yemen.

To determine cholera laboratory investigation (RDT and culture) results.
This study was conducted as a part of current efforts for the management of cholera in Yemen. It is also expected to
contribute in a better understanding of effectiveness of health interventions, and making operational and strategic
recommendations that can be used to improve the designing and implementation.
Biography
Abdullah Ali Gafer studied Epidemiology at the Al-Razi University, Yemen and graduated as MS in 2021. He then joined the center
research epidemiology in Yemen.

noitcefnI

Jiarong Zhong*1, Douglas Dickinson2, and Stephen
Hsu2

Georgia State University, USA

Camellix Research Laboratory, USA

Department of Oral Biology & Diagnostic Sciences, Augusta University, USA
Effects of epigallocatechingallate-palmitate (EC16) on in vitro norovirus
infection
orovirus is the world-leading cause of acute gastroenteritis associated with severe symptoms and deaths. However,
vaccines against norovirus are currently not available, and medications that specifically target human norovirus
infection are still under development. The current study evaluated the suitability of EC16, EGCG, and LTP for virucidal
Nformulations (based on auto-oxidation), and used a murine norovirus (MNV S99, a human norovirus surrogate) cell
infection system to evaluate the virucidal activity of EC16 sanitizer formulations, and as a treatment and prevention model
tMoe etxhaomdi:n e in vitro the antiviral activity of EC16 in comparison to EGCG.
Initially, formulation suitability tests were conducted to compare EGCG (epigallocatechingallate), EC16 and
tea polyphenol-palmitate in alcohol solution and hand hygiene formulations. The virucidal activity of EC16 was then
tested in hand sanitizer gel and hand sanitizer foam formulations using a TCID50 time-kill suspension assay. In vitro
treatment and prevention tests were performed using a 1-hour incubation of EC16 or EGCG with RAW264.7 cells, either
pCroen-cinlufescitoionn: or post-infection with MNV. Statistical analysis employed the two-tailed student t test (alpha=0.05).
Here we report, for the first time, that the antiviral activity of EC16 could be used in prevention and treatment
of norovirus infection, pending future proof-of-concept in vitro and in vivo studies prior to human trials. In addition, the
virucidal property of EC16 is suitable for use in hand hygiene and disinfectant products. It was also found that EGCG has
lAouwdeire nanctei vTiarakle a Actwivaityy: comparing to EC16, and it is not suitable for virucidal formulations due to rapid auto-oxidation.


The audience will understand how the natural company can be used for infectious disease with significant side effect.

Understand the severity of alcohol-resistant pathogenic microorganism on our public health and clinical settings.
Know the disadvantage of current hand hygiene antiseptics, and have the knowledge on new technologies to prevent
alcohol-resistant microorganism infection in the future.
Biography
Jiarong Zhong earned bachelor`s degree from Georgia State University in Atlanta, a Master of Science degree from Georgia State
University. He spent over eight years conducting researches in various virus related projects, such as rabies infection, HIN1, and
norovirus infection.

noitcefnI

Sisay Shewasinad Yehualashet
Debre Berhan University, Ethiopia
Predictors of adherence to COVID-19 prevention measure among communities
in North Shoa zone, ethiopia based on health belief model : A cross-sectional
study
Introduction:
Coronavirus disease 2019 (COVID-19) is an emerging respiratory infections and is known to cause illness
ranging from the common cold to severe acute respiratory syndrome. At present, the disease has been posing a serious
threat to the communities, and it is critical to know the communities  level of adherence on COVID-19 prevention measures.
Thus, this study aimed to identify the predictors of adherence to COVID-19 prevention measure among communities in
NMoertthho Sdhso: a zone, Ethiopia by using a health belief model.
Community-based cross-sectional study design was employed. A total of 683 respondents were interviewed
using a structured and pre-tested questionnaire. The data were collected by using a mobile-based application called
 Google form.  Logistic regression was performed to analyze the data. Estimates were reported in adjusted odds ratios
wReitshu 9lt5: % confidence intervals (CI) and a significant association was declared at p-value of less than 0.05.
The overall adherence level of the community towards the recommended safety measures of COVID-19 was 44.1%.
Self-efficacy (AOR = 0.23; 95% 0.14, 0.36), perceived benefits (AOR = 0.35; 95% 0.23, 0.56), perceived barriers (AOR =
3.36; 95% 2.23, 5.10), and perceived susceptibility of COVID-19 (AOR = 1.60; 95% 1.06, 2.39) were important predictors
tChoant cilnuflsuioenncse: d the adherence of the community to COVID-19 preventive behaviors.
In this study, the overall adherence level of the community towards the recommended safety measures of
COVID-19 was relatively low. It is vital to consider the communities  self-efficacy, perceived benefits, perceived barriers
and perceived susceptibility of COVID-19 in order to improve the adherence of the community towards the recommended
sKaefyetwyo mrdeas:s ures of COVID-19.
COVID-19, Adherence to COVID-19 preventive measures, North Shoa zone.
Biography
Mr. Sisay Shewasinad Yehualashet is lecturer in the Department of nursing in Government university at Debre Birhan University,
Ethiopia. He is a graduate nurse of MadaWalabu University of undergraduate and MSc on child health nursing from Addis Abaaba
University and clinical nurse at wogere and Jihur health center.
He had trainings on Basic computer skills, Systemic review and Meta-analysis, R-software, SPSS, Stata 14 and Endnote. The training
helped him to look on the ways enhancing problem identification, prioritization and implementations strategies to improve health
services of a given community. His research interests were on Maternal and Child health, Reproductive health, Infections diseases, Non-
communicable diseases, Quality of care, youth and adolescent health. He published more than 21 article papers on reputed international
and national journals. He participated on different qualitative and quantitative research.

noitcefnI

Mouna Jlidi*1,2, Ismahen Akremi1,2, Adel Haj Ibrahim1,
Wided Brabra1,2, Manel Ben Ali1,2 and Mamdouh Ben
Ali1,2

Laboratory of Microbial Biotechnology and Engineering Enzymes (LBMIE),
University of Sfax, Tunisia

Astrum Biotech, Business incubator, Center of Biotechnology of Sfax (CBS),
University of Sfax, Tunisia
Probiotic properties of bacillus strains isolated from gastrointestinal tract
against pathogenic vibriosis
ibriosis is one of the major diseases leading to massive fish mortality. Probiotics may provide a potential alternative
method to protect fish from pathogens and to promote a balanced environment minimizing the use of antibiotics
in vitro
and chemotherapy. The aims of this study were to (i) isolate and purified marine sporeformers strains from Sardine
Vand shrimp intestine, (ii) screen for bacteria with potential probiotic properties, and (iii) carry out their safety
Vibrio harveyi Vibrio anguillarum
assessment using a subtractive procedure. Among 108 sporeformers strains, five strains exhibited a strong antibacterial
activity against Vibriosis such as and . These selected strains were unaffected by high
temperature and gastrointestinal conditions, produced amylase, protease and lipase activities, showed high percentages
Bacillus amyloliquefaciens Bacillus subtilis
of auto-aggregation and co-aggregation with pathogens, as well as a strong adhesion to fish mucus. Partial 16S rDNA gene
B. subtilis
sequencing and MALDI-TOF MS revealed that isolates are or . All of them were
B. subtilis
susceptible to antibiotics, while hydrolic enzymes and virulence factors were not detected for S17. In conclusion,
based on their proprieties and their safety assessment, S17 could serve as potential probiotic candidate for
aAquudaiceunlctuer Tea.ke Away:


Provide an idea to select good and friendly bacteria to control diseases.

Control or prevent fish pathogens such as Vibriosis by using a viable and friendly alternative  Probiotics .
In vitro subtractive screening by several physiologic criteria and safety assessment in order to select potential
probiotic used aquaculture and for fish feeding process.
Biography
Mouna Jlidi PhD student at center of biotechnology of Sfax, Tunisia. She start to work in 2017. She will graduate soon. She published
articles in several field with her teal of work.
Participants List
Abdullah Ali Abdullah Gafer 47
Amanda H Cavalheiro 17
Amarjeet Gambhir 19
Ambresh S Badad 41
Amit Kumar Kesharwani 39
Anas Alyousef 28
Anju Kaushal 36
Annapurna Ahuja 22
Asit Kumar Chakraborty 21
Asmaa Al Rashed 30
Balamurugan R 23
Gayatri Tripathi 33
Grace Lalana Christopher 18
Hector Javier Gallardo Valencia 34
J.A.A.S. Jayaweea 45
Jiarong Zhong 48
Kai-Fu Tang 11
Lester Jay T. Corsame 20
Marah El Tahir El Beeli 46
Maria Rosanova 26
Marshal Sikandangwa 15
Mohamad Said Almasri 44
Mouna Jlidi 50
Nashwa M. Al-Kasaby 27
Infection 2022

Pooyan Afzali Harsini 14
Rehab Mahmoud Abd El-Baky 40
Rohit Kothari 42
Sayan Bhattacharyya 38
Seema Mittal 25
Shyamapada Mandal 16
Sisay Shewasinad Yehualashet 49
Stephen Hsu 08
Taif Shah 37
Ulrich Steinhoff 07
Wei Jiang 12
Infection 2022

UPCOMING CONFERENCES
3rd Edition of World Congress on
Infectious Diseases
October 19-20, 2022 | Online Event
https://infectious-diseases-conferences.magnusgroup.org/
4th Edition of World Congress on
Infectious Diseases
June 26-28, 2023 | Rome, Italy
https://infectiouscongress.com/
Questions? Contact
+1 (702) 988-2320 or
Inquires: infectious@magnusconference.com
For Registration:
https://infectiouscongress.com/register