Public Health 101 Series
Introduction to Public
Health
Instructor name
Title
Organization
Note: This slide set is in the public domain and may be customized as needed by
the user for informational or educational purposes. Permission from the Centers for
Disease Control and Prevention is not required, but citation of the source is
appreciated.
Course Topics
Introduction to Public Health
1. Public Health Definition and Key Terms
2. History of Public Health
3. A Public Health Approach
4. Core Functions and Essential Services of Public Health
5. Stakeholder Roles in Public Health
6. Determining and Influencing the Public s Health

Learning Objectives
After this course, you will be able to
describe the purpose of public health

define key terms used in public health

identify prominent events in the history of public health

recognize the core public health functions and services

describe the role of different stakeholders in the field of

public health
list some determinants of health

recognize how individual determinants of health affect

population health

Topic 1
Public Health Definition
and Key Terms

Public Health Defined
 The science and art of preventing
disease, prolonging life, and promoting
health through the organized efforts
and informed choices of society,
organizations, public and private
communities, and individuals. 
 CEA Winslow
Photo: IF Fisher and EL Fisk
Winslow CEA. The untilled field of public health. Mod Med 1920;2:183 91. 5
The Mission of Public Health
 Fulfilling society s interest
in assuring conditions in
which people can be
healthy. 
 Institute of Medicine
 Public health aims to
provide maximum benefit for
the largest number of
people. 
 World Health Organization

Public Health Key Terms
clinical care: prevention, treatment, and management of illness and
the preservation of mental and physical well-being through the services
offered by medical and allied health professions; also known as health
care.
determinant: factor that contributes to the generation of a trait.
epidemic or outbreak: occurrence in a community or region of cases
of an illness, specific health-related behavior, or other health-related
event clearly in excess of normal expectancy. Both terms are used
interchangeably; however, epidemic usually refers to a larger
geographic distribution of illness or health-related events.
health outcome: result of a medical condition that directly
affects the length or quality of a person s life.
Stedman TL, ed. Stedman s medical dictionary. 28th ed. Baltimore, MD: Lippincott, Williams, and Wilkins; 2006.
Farlex, Inc. The free dictionary. Huntingdon Valley, PA: Farlex, Inc.; 2014. Available at: http://www.thefreedictionary.com/. 7
Knowledge Check
Fill in the blank with the correct answer
A. groups of people B. individuals
groups of people
Public health aims to provide ___________________
with the right to be healthy and live in conditions
that support health.

Knowledge Check
Fill in the blank with the correct answer
A. pandemic B. intervention
C. epidemic or outbreak
D. prevention
A(n) __ e_p__id__e_m__ic_ _o_r_ o__u_t_b_r_e_a_k_ _ is a disease
occurrence among a population that is in
excess of what is expected for a given time
and place.

Topic 2
The History of Public Health

Sanitation and Environmental Health
500 BCE 1840s 1970
Greeks and Romans The Public Health The Environmental
practice community Act of 1848 was Protection Agency
sanitation measures established in the was founded
United Kingdom

Pandemics
Influenza Polio HIV
500 million infected Vaccine introduced
34 million living with
worldwide in 1918 in 1955; eradication
HIV worldwide; 20%
initiative launched in
decline in new

infections since 2001

Preparedness for Disaster Response
Biologic September Hurricane
Warfare 2001 Katrina
Plague used as a Public health Emergency services,
weapon of war during surveillance public health
the Siege of Kaffa conducted after surveillance, and
the 9/11 attacks disease treatment
provided

Prevention Through Policy
Book Tobacco
Obesity
of Leviticus Laws
The world s Laws banning smoking Food labeling and
first written in public places promotion of physical
health code activity

Knowledge Check
Which of the following events in public health history
have been pandemics? (Select all that apply)
A. Siege of Kaffa
B. Influenza
C. Polio
D. Hurricane Katrina

Topic 3
A Public Health Approach

A Public Health Approach
Risk Factor Intervention
Surveillance Implementation
Identification Evaluation

Public Health Core Sciences

Cholera   A Public Health Approach
Cholera, a fatal intestinal
disease, was rampant during
the early 1800s in London,
causing death to tens of
thousands of people in the
area. Cholera was
commonly thought to be
caused by bad air from
rotting organic matter.
Photo: TJ Kirn, MJ Lafferty, CMP Sandoe, and R Taylor,
Dartmouth Medical School

John Snow, Physician
John Snow is best known for
his work tracing the source of
the cholera outbreak and is
considered the father of
modern epidemiology.
Photo: London School of Hygiene
and Tropical Medicine

Epidemiology   What is the Problem?
Cluster of Cholera Cases, London   1854
Image: The Geographical Journal

Risk Factor Identification   What Is the Cause?
Cluster of Cholera Cases and Pump Site Locations
Image: The Geographical Journal

Intervention Evaluation   What Works?
Through continuous research, Snow understood what
interventions were required to
stop exposure to the contaminated water

supply on a larger scale, and
stop exposure to the entire supply of

contaminated water in the area

Implementation   How Do You Do It?
John Snow s research convinced
the British government that the
source of cholera was water
contaminated with sewage
Photo: Justin Cormack

Knowledge Check
Fill in the blanks with the correct answers.
Each public health core science helps us to
__p__ro__te__c_t_ _ and _p_r_o_m__o__te_ t he public s health by
providing public health practitioners with the
answers they need.

Knowledge Check
Match each component of the public health approach
with the questions they answer.
A. Risk Factor Identification B. Surveillance
C. Implementation D. Intervention Evaluation
B. Surveillance
1. What is the problem?
A. Risk Factor Identification
2. What is the cause?
D. Intervention Evaluation
3. What works?
C. Implementation
4. How do you do it?

Topic 4
Core Functions
and Essential Services
of Public Health

Three Core Functions of Public Health
Systematically collect, analyze,
Assessment
and make available information
on healthy communities
Policy Promote the use of a scientific
knowledge base in policy and
Development
decision making
Assurance Ensure provision of services to
those in need
Institute of Medicine. The future of public health. Washington, DC: National Academies Press; 1988. 28
Ten Essential Public Health Services
1. Monitor Health
2. Diagnose and Investigate
3. Inform, Educate, Empower
4. Mobilize Community Partnership
5. Develop Policies
6. Enforce Laws
7. Link to/Provide Care
8. Assure a Competent Workforce
9. Evaluate
10. Research

Core Functions at Government Levels
Policy
Assessment Development Assurance
Federal National tobacco Smoking ban Federal grants
public health on commercial for antismoking
surveillance flights research
State Funding
Monitor state Increase
for campaign
tobacco use tobacco tax
through
Proposition 99
Resources to help
Local Report on local County laws
smokers quit
tobacco use prohibiting
in multiple
smoking in bars
languages

Knowledge Check
Which of the following is NOT a core function of public
health?
A. Assurance
B. Assessment
C. Authority
D. Policy development

Knowledge Check
The essential health services of monitoring health and
diagnosing and investigating disease relate to which
core public health function?
A. Assurance
B. Assessment
C. Policy Development

Topic 5
Stakeholder Roles
in Public Health

Partners in the Public Health System
Clinical Care
Community
Delivery System
Government
Ensuring the Conditions
Employers
Public Health
for Population Health
and Businesses
Infrastructure
Academia The Media
Institute of Medicine. The future of the public's health in the 21st century. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2002. 34
Nongovernmental Organization Examples
Organization Type Example
Professional membership American Public Health
organizations Association
Associations related to a American Cancer Society
specific health concern
Organizations of citizens Americans for Nonsmokers
focused on health concerns Rights
Foundations that support Bill and Melinda Gates
health projects and influence Foundation
public policy development
Institute of Medicine. Who will keep the public healthy? Workshop summary. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2003. 35
Health Care as a Partner in Public Health
Public Health Health Care
Population focus Individual patient focus
Public health ethic Personal service ethic
Prevention or public Diagnosis and treatment
health emphasis emphasis
Joint laboratory Joint laboratory
and field involvement and patient involvement
Clinical sciences peripheral Clinical sciences essential to
to professional training professional training
Public sector basis Private sector basis

Other Partners in Public Health
  Vehicle for public discourse
Media   Health education and promotion
  Health communication
  Social media as catalyst
  Employer-sponsored health insurance
Employers
programs
and Businesses
  Wellness initiatives and benefits
  Healthy workplaces and communities
  City planning
Government
  Education
Agencies
  Health in all policies
  Education
  Training
Academia
  Research
  Public Service

Knowledge Check
Match each stakeholder to its role in public health.
A. Academia B. Employers and businesses
C. Government D. Media
D. Media
1. Vehicle for public discourse
C. Government
2. Health in all policies
A. Academia
3. Education and training
B. Employers and businesses
4. Wellness initiatives and benefits

Topic 6
Determining and Influencing
the Public s Health

Health Determinants
Genes and biology

Health behaviors

Social or societal

characteristics
Health services or medical

care
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Social determinants of health. http://www.cdc.gov/socialdeterminants/FAQ.html. 40
What Determines the Health of a Population?
Genes and Biology
Social/Societal
Characteristics;
Health Behaviors
Total Ecology
Medical Care
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Social determinants of health. http://www.cdc.gov/socialdeterminants/FAQ.html. 41
Health Impact Pyramid
Frieden TR. Framework for public health action: the health impact pyramid. Am J Public Health 2010;100:590 5. 42
Health Impact Pyramid
Frieden TR. Framework for public health action: the health impact pyramid. Am J Public Health 2010;100:590 5. 43
Knowledge Check
List the four determinants of health.
Genes and biology
Health behaviors
Social/societal characteristics
Health services or medical care

Knowledge Check
Fill in the blanks using the following
choices.
A. down B. up
down
As we move the health impact
pyramid, the public health impact grows
greater.
2. As we move u p the health impact
pyramid, the amount of individual effort
increases.

Public Health Core Sciences

Course Summary
During this course, you learned to
describe the purpose of public health

define key terms used in public health

identify prominent events in the history of public health

recognize the core public health functions and services

describe the role of different stakeholders in the field of

public health
list some determinants of health

recognize how individual determinants of health affect

population health

QUESTIONS?

Resources and Additional Reading
  American public health Association (APHA). The Prevention and public health Fund: a critical
investment in our nation s physical and fiscal health. APHA Center for Health Policy Issue Brief.
Washington, DC: APHA; 2012. http://www.apha.org/NR/rdonlyres/8FA13774-AA47-43F2-838B-
1B0757D111C6/0/APHA_PrevFundBrief_June2012.pdf.
  California Department of public health. TabaccoFreeCA. http://www.Tobaccofreeca.org.
  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Key facts about seasonal flu vaccine.
http://www.cdc.gov/flu/protect/keyfacts.htm.
  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Overweight and obesity.
http://www.cdc.gov/obesity/index.html.
  Centers for Disease Control and Prevention. Social determinants of health.
http://www.cdc.gov/socialdeterminants/FAQ.html.
  Centers for Medicare and Medicaid Services. National health expenditure projections: 2008 
2018. http://www.cms.gov/Research-Statistics-Data-and-Systems/Statistics-Trends-and-
Reports/NationalHealthExpendData/downloads/proj2008.pdf.
  Dean H. Introduction to public health, epidemiology, and surveillance. Presented at the CDC
Science Ambassador Program, July 16, 2012.
  Frieden, TR. Framework for public health action: the health impact pyramid. Am J public health
  Kindig D, Stoddart G. What is population health? Am J public health. 2003;93:380 3.
  Institute of Medicine. For the public s health: investing in a healthier future. Washington, DC:
National Academies Press; 2012.
  Institute of Medicine. Primary care and public health: exploring integration to improve
population health. Washington, DC: The National Academies Press; 2012.

Resources and Additional Reading
  Institute of Medicine. The future of public health. Washington, DC: The National Academies
Press; 1988.
  Institute of Medicine. The future of the public's health in the 21st century. Washington, DC: The
National Academies Press; 2002.
  Institute of Medicine. Who will keep the public healthy? Workshop summary. Washington, DC:
The National Academies Press; 2003.
  Pearl R. Tobacco smoking and longevity. Science 1938;87:216 7.
  Preamble to the Constitution of the World Health Organization as adopted by the International
Health Conference, New York, June19 July 22, 1946.
  Federal Communications Commission. Texting while driving. http://www.fcc.gov/guides/texting-
while-driving.
  UNAIDS. UNAIDS World AIDS Day Report, 2012.
http://www.unaids.org/en/media/unaids/contentassets/
documents/epidemiology/2012/gr2012/JC2434_WorldAIDSday_results_en.pdf.
  Skelton A. Introduction to public health science and practice.  Presented at the CDC Steven M.
Teutsch Prevention Effectiveness Fellowship Orientation, August 15, 2012.
  US Department of Health, Education, and Welfare. Smoking and health. Washington, DC: public
health Service; 1964. http://profiles.nlm.nih.gov/ps/access/NNBBMQ.pdf.
  Winslow CEA. The untilled field of public health. Mod Med 1920;2:183 91.
  World Health Organization (WHO). World report on violence and health. Geneva: WHO; 2002.
http://www.who.int/violence_injury_prevention/violence/world_report/en/.

Disclaimers
Links provided in this course to nonfederal organizations are provided solely as a
service to our users. These links do not constitute an endorsement of these
organizations nor their programs by the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention (CDC) or the federal government, and none should be inferred. CDC
is not responsible for the content contained at these sites.
Use of trade names and commercial sources is for identification only and does
not imply endorsement by the Division of Scientific Education and Professional
Development, Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services,
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the Public Health Service, or the U.S.
Department of Health and Human Services.
The findings and conclusions in this course are those of the authors and do not
necessarily represent the official position of the Centers for Disease Control and
Prevention.

For more information, please contact the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention
Telephone: 1CDC-INFO (232-4636)/TTY: 1232-6348
Visit: http://www.cdc.gov | Contact CDC at: 1CDC-INFO or http://www.cdc.gov/info
The findings and conclusions in this course are those of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official position of the
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention.
Center for Surveillance, Epidemiology, and Laboratory Services
Division of Scientific Education and Professional Development